PBS Independent Lens: Trudell
=============================

![alt](images/2017-pbs-trudell-film.jpg)

https://www.pbs.org/independentlens/trudell/

## Film

https://www.pbs.org/independentlens/trudell/film.html

PHOTOS [L-R]

**John Trudell speaks at a press conference during the Alcatraz
occupation (1971) Photo: Ilke Hartman **

_A '70s-era photograph: Close-up of John Trudell, with long wavy dark
hair; he talks into two microphones as a woman, in shadow, sits in the
background. He wears a black leather jacket and a black fedora with a
white bandana tied above the brim. _

**Trudell burns the American flag on the steps of the FBI headquarters
in Washington, D.C. (1979)**

_A man, his back to the camera, stands on the steps of the J. Edgar
Hoover FBI Building in Washington, D.C. and sets fire to a large
upside down American flag. He wears a long black coat and a black
fedora._

**Trudell speaks at the Black Hills Survival Summit (1980)**

_1980 photo of John Trudell, with long dark hair, a mustache and a
light beard, holding a microphone and talking; he wears a modern
traditional Native American shirt with thick ribbons on the front and
sleeve._

**_He stands alone as being the most effective Native American
activist we have today._** --Bonnie Raitt

**TRUDELL** follows the extraordinary life of Native American poet and
activist John Trudell, from his impoverished childhood in Omaha to his
leadership in the American Indian Movement (AIM) and his reincarnation
as an acclaimed musician and spoken word poet. Using decades-old 16 mm
and Super 8 film and video footage as a backdrop, filmmaker Heather
Rae paints an intimate portrait of a man whose spirit and words have
awakened the Native consciousness.

The film begins in the late 1960s, when Trudell and a community group,
Indians of All Tribes, occupied Alcatraz Island for 21 months in a
symbolic effort to claim the island for the Indian people. The event
brought international attention to the American Indian cause and
helped to ignite the contemporary Indian People's Movement.

"What Alcatraz meant was that for the first time we saw young Native
people standing up and saying we have rights," said Cherokee leader
and Alcatraz activist, Wilma Mankiller.

After the Alcatraz occupation, Trudell went on to become national
spokesman of the American Indian Movement, earning a reputation as one
of the most volatile political "subversives" of the 1970s. The FBI
dossier on Trudell exceeded 17,000 pages, one of the longest in the
bureau's history.

**John Trudell's wife Tina and their children**

![alt](/photos/trudell-family.jpg)

_1970s studio portrait of a Native American woman, with long dark
straight hair parted in the middle, smiling, surrounded by her
children: two young girls on each side and a baby in her lap._

In 1979, Trudell's controversial career in politics came to a sudden
end. Hours after he burned an American flag in protest on the steps of
the FBI headquarters in Washington, D.C., Trudell's pregnant wife,
three children and mother-in-law were killed in a suspicious house
fire on a Nevada reservation. He retreated from the public eye, and
spent the next four years driving a car throughout North America. It
was during this time that Trudell's voice as a poet began to surface,
giving him a new expression for his powerful opinions and raw
emotions.

"About six months after the fire…these lines came into my head and
something told me to write them down and not stop writing them," said
Trudell. "They're called poems but in reality they're lines given to
me to hang on to."

In 1983 Trudell began to put what he called his "hanging on lines" to
music with the help of friend and fellow activist Jackson Browne and
Kiowa guitar legend the late Jesse Ed Davis. The recordings drew the
attention of musicians, activists and critics and put Trudell into the
realm of social theorist and philosopher. In his musical and film
career, Trudell has worked with the likes of Robert Redford (_Incident
at Oglala_), Sam Shepard and Val Kilmer (_Thunderheart_), Kris
Kristofferson, Bonnie Raitt, Jackson Browne and Amy Ray of the Indigo
Girls. Angelina Jolie produced Trudell's most recent album, _Bone
Days_, and executive produced TRUDELL, the documentary.

Combining interviews with with archival footage, concert clips and
abstract imagery, TRUDELL tells the story of a fascinating man and a
complex artist whose impact continues to grow.

## Words & Music

https://www.pbs.org/independentlens/trudell/words.html

**John Trudell Discography**

1. Tribal Voice (1983)
1. AKA Graffiti Man (1986)
1. But This Isn’t El Salvador (1987)
1. Heart Jump Bouquet (1987)
1. Fables and Other Realities (1991)
1. Child’s Voice:
1. Children of the Earth (1992)
1. AKA Graffiti Man, Re-release (1992)
1. Johnny Damas & Me (1994)
1. Blue Indians (1999)
1. Descendant Now Ancestor (2001)
1. Bone Days (2001)


## Interview with John Trudell

https://www.pbs.org/independentlens/trudell/interview.html

PHOTO _John Trudell poses with director Heather Rae in front of the
TRUDELL movie poster. Trudell wears a long black coat, glasses and a
dark skullcap over his long hair. Rae, a fair-skinned Cherokee woman,
wears a moss green turtleneck and a brown suede coat; her long, light
brown hair is pulled back._

_Filmmaker Heather Rae with John Trudell at the 2005 Sundance Film
Festival_
        
Activist and spoken word artist John Trudell is known for his
eloquence and his ability to move people with his words. As a leader
of the American Indian Movement of the 1960s and 1970s, Trudell took
on the U.S. government's treatment of Native people, focusing national
attention on Indian issues. In response, the FBI kept a watchful eye
on Trudell and created a 17,000-page dossier on his activities. After
his family died in a suspicious fire in 1979, Trudell left organized
politics and began to write poetry, soon after he put his words to
music.

In February 2006, John Trudell talked to _Independent Lens_ about the
making of TRUDELL, his work and his life.

Why did you choose to let Heather Rae make a documentary about your
life?

I had been approached by another party, which was interested in doing
a documentary, but it meant that they would be traveling and living
with me for two to three months. I wasn't interested in having to live
with a camera--I have a hard enough time getting along with myself. I
don't need cameras around and all that action. Being followed by a
camera…means whatever documentation is being made, it's being limited
to a certain timeframe--the time they're there with the camera--so
it's more personality oriented and interaction and things of that
nature. It's a different kind of documentary.

Heather approached me around the same time. The first thing that
struck me was that Heather was really coming from a place of
respect. She had heard my work and was truly influenced by it. She's a
generation behind me and I thought that it would be interesting to see
how my generation and the things we did was perceived by the
generation behind us, so I had an interest in that. One of the things
in making the agreement, though, was that I wanted to be sure that
Heather and whatever team she put together, that they were making this
documentary about how they perceived me. I didn't want to get involved
any more than necessary because I didn't want to put her in a position
of making a doc about me the way I wanted to be perceived. I avoided
that. The one thing I did insist on is I wanted to soundtrack it. I
wanted this film to have a soundtrack, not that anyone opposed. So
then we went for it. We started to make the documentary.

Were you surprised by the result?

I like the path that they [the filmmakers] took. What I appreciate
about the way they handled it is that they took my story and placed it
in the context of a larger story of what was going on at the
time. It's more than just a history of me. It serves a larger purpose
than just hey, look at me!

What kind of relationship did you and Heather develop?

It's almost like we were good friends from the beginning. We could
talk freely about anything--which helps tremendously to have real
expression of ideas and thoughts. So I always felt that there was a
friendship there from the beginning. I wouldn't have agreed to do this
with Heather if I didn't get a good hit off of her in the beginning,
just energy-wise. She was alright, and she brought a certain honesty,
as a part of who she is.

What was the most challenging aspect of telling your life story?

Talking about what happened to [my wife] Tina and the kids, that's
always the most difficult. I really appreciated the way Heather did
this. Tina needs to be recognized, what happened needs to be
recognized. It's not just something that should just fade away into
the darkness of history and nobody knows that it ever happened. So,
the fact that Heather put the story together in the way that she did
and paid that recognition to Tina. I think that's good.

PHOTO _I could drive down the road and be writing, literally, hold
that steering wheel between my knees and jot down these lines, have a
cigarette and drink some coffee._
          
~

When you talk about your writing, you say that your lines just came to
you. Can you explain?

That's literally, figuratively, precisely, exactly what happened. I
was in that car in Vancouver [British Columbia], and those lines came
into my head and I knew--I mean, I don't hear voices or anything like
that but I hear things in my head, my thoughts maybe--and I was just
told, write these lines down and don't stop. So I wrote those first
lines and it was like an explosion of words, maybe, and feelings. That
was maybe in August of '79 and within six months of starting, I wrote
all the time. I mean, I wrote all the time. There would be times I
would be working on four different poems simultaneously--I did that
once just as an exercise--one that had to do with happy love, one that
had to do with broken love, one would be more socially political and
one that would be more spiritual or environmental.

In the period of the most intensive writing, I drove a lot. I drove
250,000 miles between the U.S. and Canada in five years. I went to the
moon ten times! I could drive down the road and be writing, literally,
hold that steering wheel between my knees and jot down these lines,
have a cigarette and drink some coffee. So I wrote as much as I could
because I thought, they're going to go away, it'll stop, so I'm going
to write as much as I can and lay it in. Then the other thing that
would happen is, I would get these lines and at first I always wrote
every line down and sometimes I'd think, well, I'll write it down
later, but I'd forget those lines. I want 'em back, but I forgot
'em. And then there came the time when it seemed like the lines
weren't coming so much anymore. And then I just looked at it and
thought, maybe I'm going to be a little dry on lines but I'm just
replenishing and the lines that I forgot that I didn't write down,
those are the lines that I offered back, so I will get more
lines. That's just how I looked at it. I didn't freak myself out
because I never identified myself as a writer.

How often do you write now?

I don't write as much now as I used to, but I write. The lines still
come, maybe periodically, and I'll go through these little bursts of
time where I write a lot of things then a long period of time where
maybe I don't write anything. Or these lines will come into my head
and I'll write 'em down in a little book, just little sets of lines,
but I won't try to make stories or poems out of them. I'm doing a lot
of that now, just the lines.

By the mid-1980s, you had left organized politics completely, but are
organizations like AIM (American Indian Movement) still active?

PHOTO _All that I am is me. So I'm not really a poet or a writer or an
actor or an activist, I'm me, and these are things that I do.

~
                    
To some degree and level they are, either by the same name or in
different forms. All of that activism is still active because the need
for it is there. But for me, I'm not an organization person. The only
group I'm with now on a consistent basis is my band. For me, I think
it's a matter of being more concise. All that I am is me. So I'm not
really a poet or a writer or an actor or an activist, I'm me and these
are things that I do. I figure now that the best way for me to
participate is to just be me and to do the things that I do because my
consciousness is my consciousness. I still have my political
consciousness and I have my social consciousness and my spiritual
consciousness and my distorted consciousnesses--I still have all of
that. So to me, it's just to try to be as coherent as I can and to
make as much sense as I can in doing whatever it is that I do.

PHOTO _Maybe some tribes were granted a little more sovereignty here
and a little more this and that there, but basically, we're still
operating outside the protections of these so-called protecting
things, like law and political systems._
                        
~
                          
Looking back, did events like the occupations of Alcatraz and the
Bureau of Indian Affairs and the siege at Wounded Knee II made things
better for Native people?

I definitely think that these times had a positive effect. What I view
life like is about energy. Everything is about energy--everything. We
physically are little units of electrical energy and we vibrate and
project electromagnetic thought. When I look at it in that context,
what happened in the '60s and the '70s had a positive effect because
it made our energy stronger, so to speak. Our spirit is stronger as a
result of what happened in those times. And in the material, physical
sense, I think we're holding our own. I don't know if things are
necessarily better or worse. We're still having to hold our own
because of the economics and the politics and the laws and all of this
stuff--none of this is in our favor, none of these things were
designed to protect us, and that hasn't changed, we couldn't change
that. Maybe some superficial changes could be made--maybe some tribes
were granted a little more sovereignty here and a little more this and
that there, but basically, we're still operating outside the
protections of these so-called protecting things, like law and
political systems.

What impact do you hope this film will have on audiences?

If they leave the screening of this film and it has stimulated
feelings and thinking, their feelings and their thoughts have been
stimulated, that's what I would like to see. I'm talking about
feelings, not just somebody just emotionally identifying. See, I just
want people to think. They don't need to believe me or not believe
me--it isn't about any of that.

### Timeline

https://www.pbs.org/independentlens/trudell/timeline.html

Poet, musician, actor and activist, John Trudell is best known for his
fearless confrontation of the harsh realities of Native American
history and culture—first, as a leader of the American Indian
Movement, and more recently, as an acclaimed musician and poet.

Trudell’s own struggles against economic and cultural deprivation—from
his impoverished childhood on the Santee Sioux reservation in Nebraska
to the strategic decimation of Native traditions—informed his passion
for activism, as well as his spoken word and musical vision.

View a series of images tracing the path of John Trudell’s life, from
his Nebraska childhood and his involvement with the American Indian
Movement (AIM) to clashes with the government and the tragic events
that inspired a prolific artistic career.

**View John Trudell’s life: in pictures and prose**

ERROR _You need Flash 6 or above to view the timeline._


## Filmmaker Bio

Heather Rae

Producer/Director

PHOTO _Heather Rae, a fair-skinned Cherokee woman with long light
brown hair parted in the middle, sits outdoors with arms folded,
smiling at the camera with her mouth closed._

In her 15-year career in film, Cherokee filmmaker Heather Rae has
worked in some producing capacity on more than a dozen documentaries
and half a dozen features. TRUDELL is the culmination of 13 years of
Rae’s work as a filmmaker and activist. It has played in more than 50
film festivals worldwide, garnering accolades such as Best Documentary
Feature at the 30th Annual American Indian Film Festival and a Special
Jury Prize for Best Documentary at the Seattle International Film
Festival.

From 1996 to 2001, Rae ran the Native Program at the Sundance
Institute and was a programmer for the Sundance Film Festival. After
leaving Sundance, Rae worked for one year as senior vice president of
production for Winter Films. In 2003, Rae independently produced the
feature film American Monster starring Adam Beach, Gary Farmer and Udo
Kier. She is currently producing A Thousand Guns starring Michael
Robinson (Trans, The Slaughter Rule) and directed by Julian Goldberger
(Trans, The Hawk is Dying) and The Space Between All Things starring
Yvonne Russo (Naturally Native, True Whispers) and directed by Randy
Redroad (The Doe Boy). Rae also co-produced Backroads, directed by
Shirley Cheechoo, which premiered at Sundance in 2000.

Prior to 1996, Rae worked on documentary films including CBS’s 500
Nations, Turner Broadcasting's The Native Americans, and PBS's
Storytellers of the Pacific. She produced a documentary on the making
of Smoke Signals for the Sundance Channel and was an associate
producer on Silent Tears. Rae currently teaches film studies at Boise
State University and sits on the board of directors for the True West
Cinema Festival and TVTV, Boise’s community television outlet. Rae
resides in Idaho with her husband and three children.

### Filmmaker Q&Q

https://www.pbs.org/independentlens/trudell/qa.html

As a Cherokee Indian, director Heather Rae has a deeply personal
connection to the work of Native American activist and musician John
Trudell. In this Q&A, Rae talks about creating a record of Trudell's
work, her desire to share Native stories with a broad audience and the
challenges of filmmaking on a shoestring.

Why did you want to make a film about John Trudell?

My interest in John as a subject came from having been deeply affected
by his spoken word. Intuitively, I felt that he represented a kind of
human being that doesn't come often, that his contribution to humanity
needed to be marked historically and otherwise. His role in the
movement days and his voice as an orator has contributed to the
inspiration of many, not just Native folks, but people from all over
the world.

PHOTO _Heather Rae, a fair-skinned Cherokee woman with long light
brown hair parted left side, poses in front of a brown, grassy
hill. She wears a green boat neck shirt and drop earrings and smiles
at the camera with her mouth closed._

**Filmmaker Heather Rae recounts how she and the crew of TRUDELL
discovered the difficulties of shooting from a helicopter--the hard
way. **
  
> The day we shot the scene where John is standing on the grassy
> hilltop, it was extremely hot. The crew was waiting along with John
> and his kids, and I didn't have the right coordinates for the
> helicopter. It took us a very long time to locate the hill, which,
> in a helicopter, looked like any other bump among hundreds of
> bumps. By the time we got there everyone was exasperated…. For all
> the beauty that is that shot, it was a hell of a day.
      
What was your introduction to the American Indian Movement and how did
it affect you?

I first learned of the movement and what it contributed to current
policy when I was in my late teens/early twenties and starting to
understand the social and political realm. It affected me a great deal
when I heard John's voice as a movement leader and prophetic force.

How did you meet John Trudell?

I met him after a show he did in Santa Monica. He was performing with
his band and after the show I approached him and asked if he was
interested in the idea of making a film about his life and work.

Considering the scope of John Trudell's catalog, how did you choose
the poems and music featured in the film?

In the writing and research process, we began to discover that there
was an inherent storyline, a trajectory of thoughts and ideas that
paralleled his journey as a human being. The narrative organically
developed from this, and contributes to the film as subtext more than
exposition.

How did you find the archival footage used in the film?

This was a lengthy and involved process. I begin early in the film's
13-year process to seek out archival/newsreel footage from the
movement days and events and anything with John. We obtained sample
reel material from several old news houses, but in the end, when it
came time to obtain masters, they didn't exist. Some of our source
masters are literally VHS dubs of a dub. Over the years, we would hear
from individuals who had material of John and had heard of the
project. This was very helpful and contributed greatly to the overall
tapestry of his story.

How did you get those in the film to share so much, including painful
memories and experiences?

Taking time. Patience. No attachment to the result; I don't believe in
the kind of filmmaking that pursues an end at any cost. I believe that
the process has to be rooted in respect and integrity. Subjects are
human beings, not components of an effort to build a career or
something. Most of the people who contributed interviews to the film
had something they wanted to say. Many have strong feelings about
John, memories of Tina and a vested interest in her image being
eternal.

What were some of the challenges you faced in making this film?

Mainly economics. This film basically was not financed, not in the
sense that we started out with a budget and went forward. There were
bits of funding that came along the way and ultimately a grant from
Native American Public Telecommunications (NAPT), which is a member of
the [public broadcasting] Minority Consortia. That grant enabled us to
really begin the finishing of the film but didn't bring it all the
way, so the last two years of completing and marketing the film have
been greatly challenging.

What impact do you hope this film will have?

I hope that the film will make a mark in history for John and the
broader community and issues he represents. I hope that the current
generations and those to come will have a deeper understanding of a
Native paradigm of reality and what the original spirit of this land
embodies. I hope the film lasts 500 years and is studied by
many. There are so few films that represent the 20th century Native
American, and particularly the original voice of one like John
Trudell.

What period of time did filming take place and when did it conclude?
Any updates on what John Trudell and others in the film have been
doing since then?

We began in 1992 and stopped shooting well into the editing process,
which began in 2002. We completed the film in December of 2004, a
matter of weeks before we premiered at Sundance. Much of the team is
working on supporting the film's theatrical and outreach life. John
has been traveling with the film, too. He is working on finishing his
next album, _Madness & The Moremes_, and has a biography in the works
by author Luis Rodriguez.

The independent film business is a difficult one. What keeps you
motivated?

Good cinema and a desire to express life in this medium; it's the only
career I've known.

Why did you choose to present your film on public television?

I think _Independent Lens_ is the perfect broadcast home for this
film. IL has a legacy of programming provocative work and daring
subjects. I don't think anyone else on the airwaves would have had us.

What are your three favorite films?

_An Injury To One, Jesus Chris Superstar, Sideways_

If you weren't a filmmaker, what kind of work do you think you'd be
doing?

Midwifery or creative sciences, such as physics.

Which filmmakers have most influenced your work?

Trinh T. Minh-ha, Alanis Obomsawin, Merata Mita, many American films
of the 1970s, Tarkovsky, Marc Levin, Barbara Hammer, Travis Wilkerson,
Argentine cinema and the French New Wave.

If you could have one motto, what would it be?

Earth is Mother, I am grateful. (I have it tattooed on me in
Cherokee.)

What sparks your creativity?

Fresh air; the art and brilliance of others; my partner in life and
the creative--my husband, my children, my family and friends; cinema
from the 1970s; my home, Idaho; land; high desert; other Native
people; mountains; France, Paris in particular.

Have screening audiences asked any questions about the film that we
did not?

Screening audiences ask unwieldy questions of John--deeply
philosophical and theoretical questions that send him on
transcendental excursions--it has been fascinating.


## Learn More

https://www.pbs.org/independentlens/trudell/more.html

**The Film**

[Filmmaker's Web Site: TRUDELL](http://www.trudellthemovie.com/)  
Visit filmmaker Heather Rae's Web site to find information about
screenings of TRUDELL and get outtakes from the film and audio clips
of John Trudell's music. Also, learn how to get involved in Native
American issues.

**John Trudell**

[John Trudell: Official Web Site](http://johntrudell.com/)  
The personal Web site of artist/activist John Trudell includes a
biography, discography and other information on the activist and
spoken word artist.

[Alternet.org: Dissenting Troubador](http://www.alternet.org/story/13391/)  
Read a 2002 story about John Trudell's work with the American Indian
Movement, his transition into music and the release of his album _Bone
Days_.

[Hollow Ear: Taos Poetry Circus 2000: Bill Nevins Talks With John
Trudell About Zen and the Art of
Renaissance](http://www.hollowear.com/words/circus2000.html)  
In this 2000 interview, John Trudell talks about environmental issues
and the way in which people--and poetry--can impact the future.

**_Stickman: John Trudell_ by Paola Igliori**  
(Inanout Press, 1994)  
A collection of poems, lyrics, talks and conversation by and with John
Trudell.

[Santee Sioux Tribe of Nebraska](http://www.santeedakota.org/)  
Learn more about the history of John Trudell's native tribe, from the
creation of the Santee Sioux reservation in 1869 to the effects of a
smallpox epidemic and the forced education of Santee Sioux youth.

**Native American Activism and Art**

[International Confederation of Autonomous Chapters of the American
Indian Movement
(AIM)](http://www.americanindianmovement.org/index.htm)  
The official Web site of the Native American activist organization,
once led by John Trudell, includes a comprehensive history of the
American Indian Movement, links to the Web sites of member tribes and
the latest news on Native American issues.

[PBS: ALCATRAZ IS NOT AN
ISLAND](http://www.pbs.org/itvs/alcatrazisnotanisland/)  
The companion Web site for this PBS documentary examines the history
and politics behind the 19-month occupation of Alcatraz by Native
American activists. View a timeline of the occupation that began in
November 1969, learn more about Indian activism and the issue of
sovereignty.

[Honor The Earth](http://www.honorearth.com/)  
A national Native environmental initiative and grant making
organization that builds awareness of Native environmental issues and
develops financial and political resources for the survival of
sustainable Native communities through music, the arts, the media, and
Indigenous wisdom. Visit the organization's Web site to listen to
public service announcements, read about past tours that have included
performances by John Trudell and more.

[American Indian Movement (AIM) Grand Governing
Council](http://www.aimovement.org/)  
Learn more about AIM, the organization headed by John Trudell in the
1970s, created to "help Native People regain human rights and achieve
restitutions and restorations." Read about racism in sports and media
and the Leonard Peltier case and listen to live Native American Web
casts including phone interviews, commentaries by elders, rare
archival speeches and music.

[American Indian Movement (AIM) Council on Security and
Intelligence](http://www.aimovement.org/csi/index.html)  
Browse scanned images of declassified FBI, CIA, Justice Department and
White House documents obtained by AIM under the U.S. Freedom of
Information Act.

[Bureau of Indian Affairs
(BIA)](http://www.doi.gov/bureau-indian-affairs.html)  
BIA administers and manages 55.7 million acres of land held in trust
by the United States for American Indians, Indian tribes, and Alaska
Natives. The resource-rich Web site offers information on tracing
Indian ancestry, tribal leaders, scholarships and more.

[Native American Rights Fund (NARF)](http://www.narf.org/)  
NARF provides legal representation and technical assistance to Indian
tribes and organizations. The organization's Web site offers case
updates, calls to action on current litigation and documents from its
National Indian Law Library.

[California State University, Long Beach: American Indian
Studies](http://www.csulb.edu/projects/ais/)  
Explore a compilation of Native art, photographs and video and audio
recordings that reflect the history, culture and experience of Native
Americans in North America, Central America and Mexico. Read articles
by Professor Troy Johnson, an expert on the Alcatraz Indian
occupation.

[Understanding Prejudice: Test Your Native
IQ](http://www.understandingprejudice.org/nativeiq/)  
Test your knowledge of Native American issues with this 10-question
quiz and peruse other parts of the Understanding Prejudice site,
created by the Social Psychology Network, to learn more about racism.

**Books**

**_The Heart as a Drum: Continuance and Resistance in American Indian
Poetry_  
by Robin Riley Fast**  
(University of Michigan Press, 2000)  
A critical look at Native American poetry that focuses on themes of
contemporary Native American literature, including community, history
and spiritual experiences.

**_The Occupation of Alcatraz Island: Indian Self-Determination and
the Rise of Indian Activism_  
by Troy R. Johnson**  
(University of Illinois Press, 1996)  
A compilation of interviews with key figures in the Native American
occupation of Alcatraz conducted during or soon after the 1969
occupation.

**_American Indian Activism: Alcatraz to the Longest Walk_  
by Troy Johnson**  
(University of Illinois Press, 1997)  
Explore the genesis and outcome of a nine-year period of Red Power
protest that began with the occupation of Alcatraz Island from 1969 to
1971.

**_American Indian Policy in the Twentieth Century_  
by Vine Deloria**  
(University of Oklahoma Press; Reprint edition, 1992)  
A comprehensive study of the U.S. government's past policies relating
to Native Americans.

**Sources**

The following served as information sources for several pages on this
site:

[The Spitfire Tour: Musicians, Actors & Activists Speaking Out on
Global Affairs](http://www.spitfiretour.org/trudell.html)

[Honor the Earth](http://www.honorearth.org/index.html)

[Library of Congress: Immigration: Native American: Destroying
Cultures](http://memory.loc.gov/learn/features/immig/native_american9.html)

Argus Leader: The Legacy of Wounded Knee

[John Trudell: Official Web Site](http://johntrudell.com/)

[PBS: ALCATRAZ IS NOT AN
ISLAND](http://www.pbs.org/itvs/alcatrazisnotanisland/)

[National Museum of the American Indian: Native
Networks](http://www.nativenetworks.si.edu/nn.htm)


## Get Involved

https://www.pbs.org/independentlens/trudell/getinvolved.html

PHOTO _John Trudell, a middle-aged man with a beard and mustache, sits
cross-legged in a wooden rocking chair in an empty field of brown
grass, scattered cumulous clouds in the distance. He wears jeans and a
black leather jacket over a black shirt, a brown skullcap over his
long hair and black sunglasses. His arms are folded on his lap._
  
**From the Filmmaker**
    
> “One of my strongest wishes for the film is that…subsequent
> generations will have a context for the contemporary Native People’s
> movement and a point of reference for leaders such as John Trudell,
> understanding their significance in history.”  —Heather Rae
     
Filmed over 12 years, TRUDELL documents the life of Native American
activist and poet John Trudell, from his impoverished childhood on a
Nebraska reservation to his days as a leader of the American Indian
Movement and his rise as an acclaimed musician. Combining images and
archival footage with interviews and performances, TRUDELL reveals the
story of one man’s passionate journey from individual to leader to
artist.
     
**Community Engagement**
     
ITVS Community is proud to support TRUDELL with a variety of community
outreach events and materials.
     
* Get facilitators’ guides and additional resources at itvs.org    
  http://itvs.org/outreach/trudell/
* Download the viewers' discussion guide (PDF)    
  https://www.pbs.org/independentlens/trudell/trudell_discussion.pdf

## Get the Video

https://www.pbs.org/independentlens/trudell/video.html

DVD copies of TRUDELL are available from:

* Appaloosa Pictures
  Email: info@trudellthemovie.com
*  Educational Video copies are available from:
  Visionmaker Video
  Phone: 402-472-3522
  Email: visionmaker@unl.edu


## Discussion Guide

by Heather Rae

[trudell-pbs-guide.pdf](trudell-pbs-guide.pdf)

Get Facilitator's guides and additional resources at:    
https://itvs.org/outreach/trudell/


~
