Help me build a library for the works of John Trudell.

https://github.com/siznax/trudell

Because, to my knowledge, no one has collected the works of John
Trudell—radio broadcasts, interviews, articles, letters, poems, music,
performances, speeches, and talks—other than by fragmentary web sites
and playlists on social media platforms.

I am backing it all up (archiving it), organizing it, and will attempt
to present in such a way as **to amplify John's voice and powerful
words, and to make them freely available forever to everyone**.

I am also documenting everything John Trudell had issues with, and
that is basically the entire history of the indigenous people of
Turtle Island (North America) since the arrival of Europeans.

I am gathering and organizing material on GitHub because it is free,
reliable, and durable. All data and media there will be uploaded to a
new collection on the Internet Archive which has a mandate to protect,
preserve, and make available this collection for free, forever, by
virtue of its stated mission: "Universal Access to All Knowledge".

I claim no right to do this. I am only a strongly like-minded human
(and coincidental technologist). I was born in the U.S., but I am
white (of European descent), and I am not a tribe member. However,
John's life and words have changed my understanding of the world and
what I choose to do with my time here.

I am **seeking guidance and participation** from like-minded people,
local (Ohlone) tribes, as well as John’s tribe (Sioux). If there is a
better way to preserve and amplify John's voice, please contact me. I
would very much like to help.

Ultimately, I hope we can announce a new "American Indian" collection
with a pow wow at the Internet Archive where selections from John’s
1983 album _Tribal Voice_ can be performed live with tribal members
and speakers selected to read John's poems. I also hope we can present
a new name for the collection in honor of John Trudell and his
contributions to indigenous peoples and like minded people
everywhere.


Steve Sisney

San Francisco, CA    
May 2020
