American Indian Public Charter School
=====================================

1996-2018

American Indian Public Charter School or AIPCS is an Oakland,
California charter middle school with predominantly low-income,
minority students. It opened in 1996 and struggled over the next few
years until a turnaround after 2000 brought up enrollment numbers and
test scores.

By 2005, the AIPCS students achieved test scores superior those of
most public schools in the state. Its principal, Ben Chavis (Lumbee),
a Native American educator, believed that minority students were best
served by high expectations for strong attendance and discipline, as
well as regular homework and summer school. Chavis was criticized for
some of his methods. In 2007, AICPS became the first public school in
Oakland to win the National Blue Ribbon Award. The AICPS attracted
an increasingly diverse student body as enrollment increased, with
higher proportions of African American, Asian and Latino students than
Native Americans. By 2015, its students were overwhelmingly Asian.

The American Indian Model Schools charter system developed from the
AIPCS in order to expand the offerings to students. Since 2007, under
new management, it has operated three schools in the city, two middle
schools (one had grades K-4 added in 2012), and a high school,
American Indian Public High School. The charter for the AIMS schools
was threatened in 2012 because of discoveries of financial
mismanagement and concerns about leadership. Although the Oakland
School District voted to revoke the charter, the school system gained
a preliminary injunction that allowed it to operate the three
schools. With new leaders, it gained a 5-year renewal of its charter
in 2013.

Other irregularities were reported in 2012 as the result of a state
"extraordinary audit" of the second middle school, AIPCS II. There
were allegations of additional mismanagement and fraud. In March 2017
former principal Ben Chavis was indicted by the federal government on
six felony counts for money laundering and mail fraud based on his
financial activities with the AIMS schools. He will be tried in
federal district court in San Francisco.

<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/American_Indian_Public_Charter_School>
