# "We must go beyond the arrogance of human rights. We must go beyond the ignorance of civil rights. We must step into the reality of natural rights because all of the natural world has a right to existence and we are only a small part of it. There can be no trade-off."

"Just because you have indian blood, if you live white, that doesn't
really make you an indian" —https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5Goh0CFSHCs

"With one 42 cent arrow we stopped it."

"Don't trust anyone who isn't angry."

----

_Lines From a Mined Mind_, 2008

"As human beings it is time to take responsibility for the power of
our Intelligence and use the power of our intelligence to think
coherently This isn't about whether we can or we can't This is about
whether we will or we won't"

"As human beings how we use our intelligence to perceive reality
dictates how we will use the power of our intelligence."

---

_Trudell_ documentary, 2005

"It has been, literally, the most blood thirsty, brutalizing system
ever imposed on this planet. That is not civilization. That's the
great lie - is that it represents civilization. That's the great
lie. Or if it does represent civilization, and that's truly what
civilization is, then the great lie is that civilization is good for
us."

"Crazy horse, we hear what you say. One earth, one mother, one does
not sell the earth that people walk upon. We are the land, how do we
sell our mother? How do we sell the star? How do we sell the air?
Crazy horse, we hear what you say. The spirit of life is almost
non-existent in the perceptual reality of the society that we're
in. It is almost non-existent. They got religion, they got
civilization, they got military, they have politics, they have
education, they have all the stuff, but they don't have the spirit to
live."

----

"Every human being is a raindrop. And when enough of the raindrops
become clear and coherent, they then become the power of the storm."

"We’re not Indians and we’re not Native Americans. We’re older than
both concepts. We’re the people, we’re the human beings."

"I think it's the responsibility of every human being, not just those
who wear the identity of poet, activist, voter, religious
person... it's the responsibility of every person. Our responsibility
is to use our intelligence as clearly and coherently as we possibly
can."

"The Earth does not grow drugs. It grows plants, herbs, and
medicines."

"No matter what they ever do to us, we must always act for the love of
our people and the earth. We must not react out of hatred against
those who have no sense."

"It’s like there is this predator energy on this planet, and this
predator energy feeds on the essence of the spirit."

"When we leave as humans we go back to being. Being human being that
really means something. But we live in a reality now in a time,
where. I would say to anyone ya know, protect your spirit. Protect
your spirit, because. Because you're in the place where spirits get
eaten."

"I'm just a human being trying to make it in a world that is very
rapidly losing its understanding of being human."

"An Indian is someone you rob, someone you steal from."

~
