10 Point Program
================

by The Red Nation (organized in 2014 by Nick Estes)

*WE DEMAND AN END TO VIOLENCE AGAINST NATIVE PEOPLES AND OUR NONHUMAN
RELATIVES THROUGH…*

1. *The Re-Instatement of Treaty Rights*

From 1776 to 1871, the U.S. Congress ratified more than 300 treaties
with Native Nations. A provision in the 1871 Indian Appropriations Act
withdrew federal recognition of Native Nations as separate political
entities, contracted through treaties made with the United States. As
a result, treaty making was abolished; and it was established that “no
Indian nation or tribe within the territory of the United States shall
be acknowledged or recognized as an independent nation, tribe, or
power with whom the United States may contract by treaty.”  We demand
the reinstatement of treaty making and the acknowledgement of Native
independence. We demand Native Nations assume their rightful place as
independent Nations guaranteed the fundamental right to
self-determination for their people, communities, land bases, and
political and economic systems.

2. *The Full Rights and Equal Protection for Native People*

Centuries of forced relocation and land dispossession have resulted in
the mass displacement of Native Nations and peoples from their
original and ancestral homelands. Today in the United States four of
five Native people do not live within reservation or federal trust
land. Many were and are forced to leave reservation and trust lands as
economic and political refugees due to high unemployment, government
policies, loss of land, lack of infrastructure, and social
violence. Yet, off-reservation Native peoples encounter equally high
rates of sexual and physical violence, homelessness, incarceration,
poverty, discrimination, and economic exploitation in cities and rural
border towns.

We demand that treaty rights and Indigenous rights be applied and
upheld both on- and off-reservation and federal trust land. All of
North America, the Western Hemisphere, and the Pacific is Indigenous
land. Our rights do not begin or end at imposed imperial borders we
did not create nor give our consent to. Rights shall be enforced
pursuant to the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous
Peoples (UNDRIP) and the historical and political doctrines of
specific Tribes.

3. *The End to Disciplinary Violence Against Native Peoples and All
   Oppressed Peoples*
   
In the United States more than three million people are incarcerated
in the largest prison system in the world. Native peoples and
oppressed peoples are disproportionately incarcerated and persecuted
by law enforcement. Within this system Native peoples are the group
most likely to be murdered and harassed by law enforcement and to
experience high rates of incarceration. This proves that the system is
inherently racist and disciplines politically disenfranchised people
to keep them oppressed and prevent them from challenging institutions
of racism like prisons, police and the law that maintain the status
quo. Racist disciplinary institutions contribute to the continued
dispossession and death of Native peoples and lifeways in North
America.

We demand an end to the racist and violent policing of Native peoples
on- and off-reservation and federal trust lands. We demand an end to
the racist state institutions that unjustly target and imprison Native
peoples and all oppressed peoples.
   
4. *The End to Discrimination Against the Native Silent Majority:
      Youth and The Poor*
      
Native youth and Native poor and homeless experience oppression and
violence at rates higher than other classes and groups of Native
peoples. Native people experience homelessness and poverty at rates
higher than other groups and Native youth suicide and criminalization
rates continue to soar. Native youth now comprise as much as 70% of
the Native population in some places. Native youth in the
U.S. experience rates of physical and sexual violence and
posttraumatic stress disorder higher than other groups. Native poor
and homeless experience rates of criminalization, alcoholism, and
violence at higher rates than other groups. Because many Native youth
and Native homeless and poor live off reservation and trust lands,
they are treated as inauthentic and without rights. Native youth and
Native poor and homeless continue to be marginalized and ignored
within Native and dominant political systems, and within mainstream
social justice approaches.

We demand an end to the silencing and blaming of Native youth and
Native poor and homeless. We demand an end to the unjust violence and
policing they experience. Native youth and Native poor and homeless
are relatives who deserve support and representation. We demand they
be at the center of Native struggles for liberation.
      
5. *The End to the Discrimination, Persecution, Killing, Torture, and
Rape of Native Women*
         
Native women are the targets of legal, political, and extra-legal
persecution, killing, rape, torture, discrimination, and
disenfranchisement in North America. This is part of the ongoing
process of eliminating women’s political and customary roles as
leaders in Native societies. In the United States more than one in
three Native women will be raped in their lifetime, often as
children. Since 1980, about 1,200 Native women have gone missing or
been murdered in Canada; many are young girls. Native women are at
higher risk of being targeted for human trafficking and sexual
exploitation than other groups. Native women continue to experience
sexism and marginalization within Native and dominant political
systems, and within mainstream social justice approaches.

We demand the end to the legal, political, and extra-legal
discrimination, persecution, killing, torture, and rape of Native
women. Women are the backbone of our political and customary
government systems. They give and represent life and vitality. We
demand that Native women be at the center of Native struggles for
liberation.
         
6. *The End to the Discrimination, Persecution, Killing, Torture, and
Rape of Native Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, Queer, and
Two-Spirit People*
            
Native LGBTQ2 people experience persecution, killing, torture, and
rape within Native Nations and within dominant society. The processes
of colonization and heteropatriarchy impose binary gender roles,
nuclear family structures, and male-dominated hierarchies that are
fundamentally at odds with Native customary laws and social
organization, where LGBTQ2 people often held positions of privilege
and esteem. The effect of this system for Native LGBTQ2 is
violent. Native LGBTQ2 experience rates of murder, sexual
exploitation, discrimination, hate crimes, homelessness and substance
abuse at high rates. Like Native youth, poor and homeless, and women,
Native LGBTQ2 continue to be marginalized and ignored within Native
and dominant political systems, and within metropolitan-based social
justice approaches that ignore the mostly rural-based issues of Native
LGBTQ2.

We demand the end to the legal, political, and extra-legal
discrimination, persecution, killing, torture, and rape of Native
LGBTQ2 in Native societies and in dominant society. Native LGBTQ2 are
relatives who deserve representation and dignity. We demand that they
be at the center of Native struggles for liberation.
            
7. *The End to the Dehumanization of Native Peoples*
            
The appropriation of Native imagery and culture for entertainment,
such as sports mascots and other racist portrayals, and the
celebration of genocide for holidays and amusement, such as Columbus
Day and Thanksgiving, dehumanize Native people and attempt to
whitewash ongoing histories of genocide and dispossession. These
appropriations contribute to the ongoing erasure of Native peoples and
seek to minimize the harsh realities and histories of
colonization. These appropriations are crimes against history.

We demand an end to the dehumanization of Native peoples through
cultural appropriation, racist imagery, and the celebrations of
genocide and colonization. Condemning symbolic and representational
violence is an essential part of any material struggle for liberation.
            
8. *Access to Appropriate Education, Healthcare, Social Services,
Employment, and Housing*
               
Access to quality education, healthcare, social services, and housing
are fundamental human rights. However, in almost every quality of life
standard, Native people have the worst access to adequate educational
opportunities, health care, social services, and housing in North
America. Native people also have the highest rates of unemployment
both on- and off-reservation than any other group in the United
States. Access to meaningful standards of living is historically
guaranteed under many treaty rights, but have been consistently
ignored and unevenly applied across geography and region.

We demand the universal enforcement and application of services to
improve the standard of living for Native peoples pursuant to
provisions in treaties and the UNDRIP, whether such peoples reside on
or off reservation and trust lands. North America is our home and we
demand more than mere survival. We demand conditions to thrive.
               
9. *The Repatriation of Native Lands and Lives and the Protection of
Nonhuman Relatives*

The ethical treatment of the land and nonhuman relatives begins with
how we act. We must first be afforded dignified lives as Native
peoples who are free to perform our purpose as stewards of life if we
are to protect and respect our nonhuman relatives—the land, the water,
the plants, and the animals. We must have the freedom and health
necessary to make just, ethical and thoughtful decisions to uphold
life. We experience the destruction and violation of our nonhuman
relatives wrought by militarization, toxic dumping and contamination,
and resource extraction as violent. Humans perpetrate this violence
against our nonhuman relatives. We will be unable to live on our lands
and continue on as beings recognized by the spirits if this violence
is allowed to continue.

We demand an end to all corporate and U.S. control of Native land and
resources. We demand an end to Tribal collusion with such
practices. We demand that Points 1-8 be enforced so as to allow Native
peoples to live in accordance with their purpose as human beings who
protect and respect life. Humans have created this crisis and continue
to wage horrific violence against our nonhuman relatives. It is our
responsibility to change this. We demand action now.
                  
10. *The End to Capitalism-Colonialism*
                  
Native people are under constant assault by a capitalist-colonial
logic that seeks the erasure of non-capitalist ways of life. Colonial
economies interrupt cooperation and association and force people
instead into hierarchical relations with agents of colonial authority
who function as a permanent occupying force on Native lands. These
agents are in place to enforce and discipline Native peoples to ensure
that we comply with capitalist-colonial logics. There are many methods
and agents of enforcement and discipline. There are the police. There
are corporations. There are also so-called ‘normal’ social and
cultural practices like male-dominance, heterosexuality, and
individualism that encourage us to conform to the common sense of
capitalism-colonialism. These are all violent forms of social control
and invasion that extract life from Natives and other oppressed
peoples in order to increase profit margins and consolidate power in
the hands of wealthy nation-states like the United States. The whole
system depends on violence to facilitate the accumulation of wealth
and power and to suppress other, non-capitalist ways of life that
might challenge dominant modes of power. Political possibilities for
Native liberation therefore cannot emerge from forms of economic or
institutional development, even if these are Tribally controlled under
the guise of ‘self-determination’ or ‘culture.’ They can only emerge
from directly challenging the capitalist-colonial system of power
through collective struggle and resistance.

We demand the end to capitalism-colonialism on a global level. Native
peoples, youth, poor and homeless, women, LGBTQ2 and nonhuman
relatives experience extreme and regular forms of violence because the
whole system relies on our death. Capitalism-colonialism means death
for Native peoples. For Native peoples to live, capitalism and
colonialism must die.

~
