Christian World View
====================

_Address in San Francisco 2001_

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GhpYEvZ-Oz4
https://www.counterpunch.org/2015/12/22/john-trudell-on-the-christian-world-view/

_Transcript from YouTube. Needs editing._

a religious perceptional reality was
used to replace a spiritual perceptional
reality all right because the spiritual
sense about a reality you're connected
to everything man you know you're
connected but in the religious
perceptional reality see you committed a
crime for being born so you forgetting
here I didn't make this up no not making
it up now okay and so anyway in order to
be justified being here to get to stay
you had to submit to the male-dominated
chain of command the authoritarian
system Siena's new religious reality
said that you know well now there's one
there's one God the gods battled it out
amongst themselves see see I can't
envision to me I've never been able to
envision gods or goddesses I can't
imagine the Creator in a human form I
mean no you know I can't and I think our
road our path to trouble started when we
started to do it that way all right I
you know looking at the earth is the
mother and these things you know call
her the goddess whatever and it's a Nazi
but I don't I don't go with God as I
know that's a limited perception reality
see they forced it on us but the trouble
came see when when we decided that the
creator entity had a human form see
because then that that rationalize and
justified mistreating the rest of the
natural world all right
I mean sexism and racism came out of
this perceptional change because once
the earth you know under the new god
thing see the earth was no longer the
mother the earth was the property this
new God and and all God's children
God didn't have a lot then but they were
very mean so their numbers expanded
through terror see but God's children
was their job an objective was to subdue
the earth for this God so in order to
achieve that objective they had to
create sexism see sexism is got to do
with how we live with the earth and
racism because now the earth was
property you know and all spiritual
value was away it was away from the
earth you know real spiritual value was
now a religious perceptional thing and
right so it wasn't all encompass
it wasn't just a part of the reality
anymore so not one of our people really
went for this because it's like you know
this is a major perceptional reality
change but anyway we committed a moral
crime for getting here so now we had to
submit to that worldview to me
coherently to me it's clearly a blatant
a blatant very blatant perceptional
altering how one perceives reality
I mean it's brainwashing intensified at
its maximum right because our ancestors
were forced to see life differently in
order to remain just physically alive
all right you know it's like I don't
really know that much about what
happened but I would suggest every
person of European descendants see that
you go and you study you want to know
more about your reality go and study
your tribal ancestry and see how you got
civilized all right see how you got
civilized because terrible things
happened and these terrible things these
are what altered the perceptional
reality see and because the basic basic
part of this and that altering of the
perceptional reality what we're getting
down to a seeds it made us become
irresponsible as human beings because we
can blame the bad guys for being bad
guys but that don't work it's not enough
it's about human beings remembering
their spiritual reality their spiritual
identity and accepting the
responsibility from that perceptional
reality taking responsibility because
the bad guys only get away with what
they get away with because we don't take
responsibility because of the difference
between blaming somebody for something
and taking responsibility
so when Columbus got here he got off the
boat and he said to the first people he
saw who are you Universal people he saw
said we're human beings and Columbus
said all Indians and I'm right now when
I'm talking Columbus is every descendant
of the tribe of Europe that came
we're not down one person here we're not
going to mindset alright this is a
mentality that came the Columbus
mentality we named it right because but
in about discovering this is you know
it's like almost like this is when the
virus got here and this is how long it's
been here but because you know we've
never had this disease before that we
have no natural we can't we don't have
an immunity to it but if we can survive
the ravages of this disease we will
evolve an immunity to it because we are
the part of the earth and that's what
happens right anyway anyway Columbus got
here and he didn't know what it meant to
be a human being see that perceptional
reality of being a human being and what
it really meant had been erased from
descendents of the tribes of Europe by
the time they got here so when we when
we introduced ourselves to the European
as human beings they just didn't get it
it wasn't a part of their perceptional
reality they might know how to say the
words right but being a human being had
changed in their reality right we know
there was an inquisition
and his inquisition went on for four or
five hundred years in europe the purpose
of the Inquisition was to alter the
perceptional reality of the descendants
of the tribes of Europe to make them
believe and see reality the way the
church wanted them to believe and see
reality the church called it they waged
a war for possession for possession is
it important they waged a war for the
possession of the souls of the godless
heathens and it to be a godless heathen
you just didn't believe in God it was a
party in reality or another way becoming
a godless heathen was to question the
authority of the church to do this see
not again I'm not making this up you
know this this this did transpire these
things did happen and they killed as
many people as they could I guarantee it
in order to get the other ones to submit
so they killed as efficiently as they
could with the technology they had at
their disposal at that time all right
and because they created a
rationalization as to why to do what so
it just became as efficient as they
could do
at some point the descendants of the
tribes of Europe no longer knew what it
meant to be a human being haters didn't
know they didn't want to know so the
descendants of the tribes of Europe in
the end had to love what they feared
which was there to possess them scene I
think it messed up love in a lot of ways
you know that they have none sorted yet
no offense but but anyway all of this
took place through our intelligence our
intelligence now whoever it is we pray
to whoever it is we pray to however we
pray whatever however we do that all
right I think that we have an obligation
and a responsibility it's about respect
if we respect our Creator then we should
use our intelligence as intelligently as
we can as often as we can and that means
with clarity and coherency
that means to activate and respect our
intelligence and activate the thinking
process so that it's going the way we
want it to be because that's why it was
given to us our intelligence as a human
as the human being part of all of this
reality is going on we were given
intelligence this is what was there to
help us through the evolutionary reality
to ride the balance so to speak of the
evolution with our intelligence or it's
our medicine is our protection it's our
self-defense those fears and doubts and
insecurities in one's daily mind in
reality how much do they affect affect
one's daily mind in reality how much do
they affect the ones of the people
around them that they're connected to
and cared about that they care about so
what's the repercussions of the fears
and the doubts and insecurities because
I guarantee you every day when we get up
we use our intelligence to create those
effects so it isn't that we're not using
our intelligence or we can't use our
intelligence we can't stop using our
intelligence but it's about as human
beings taking the responsibility be as
clear as one possibly can be about it
and use our intelligence the way our
Creator gave it to us to use keep the
balance our intelligence
this is everything that ever happened
had to change the perception reality
this the battleground had to take place
the real battleground may have been the
bleeding and the dying but it has to do
with the intelligence to alter the
perceptional reality so again about
respect see if we respect our Creator we
have a responsibility to recognize our
intelligence and use it as clearly and
coherently as we possibly can otherwise
we're just pretending we're just being
delusional and rationalizing and
justifying and just telling ourselves a
big lie if we do not use our
intelligence as intelligently as we
possibly can that's how we show respect
to our Creator then you can't say you
don't know because I just told it to you
all right I mean

~
