John Trudell on WOJB (1998)
===========================

28 February 1998

Lori Townsend

WOJB

https://web.archive.org/web/20050305035031/http://www.dickshovel.com/lsa13.html

_This interview with WOJB's Lori Townsend took place on Feb. 28,
before Trudell performed in concert in Kyle, South Dakota, part of the
25th Anniversary of Wounded Knee:_

Trudell: Being here - to me it's partly about acknowledging the other
Wounded Knee occupation 25 years ago, but I think in a larger sense,
it's an opportunity to get back with the community. Most of the people
here are from those days, from those times. We don't get to see each
other a lot any more because a lot of things have happened. In a way,
it's like a family reunion to me.

It's nice to know I can come back to a nice safe place. Safe, like
this is family and an opportunity to see everybody. I'm not here so
much for the politics or anything. I have a lot of friends, a lot of
relations from those times.

And it's also good to acknowledge the struggle itself. But I don't
know that I'm here to acknowledge the struggle, as much as to see the
people again.

Townsend: I know that people have said, this is to commemorate a time
of healing, from that time when there was a lot of division. People
were separated by the very nature of the struggle. What have you seen
in 25 years, as people come together, being able to heal from that
time?

Trudell: (laughs) That's a hard one to answer. I think we've learned
more. And I think that learning is the healing itself. In pragmatic,
practical terms, there are still personality differences and political
differences that different individuals have. So on one level, it
doesn't look like it's been healed. But on another level, we can all
come back into one environment together and be together. Whatever our
opinions and attitudes are, they don't get in the way of us all being
together. That's like, there is some type of healing that has taken
place. But I've never really approached it myself so much from the
healing aspect, as the survivors aspect. Here's who survived, here's
who still standing.

I look at it like that. I think healing, in a way, is an individual
process. It has to happen in an individual before it can happen in a
community.

Again, if we learn from our experiences, then we have more
knowledge. To me, that's always essential to healing - knowledge and
understanding. Very essential. But on the other hand, you can l nave
real healing if one does not look within themselves and start that
healing process.

Townsend: Your music has very strong messages. I wonder sometimes what
it is that you hope people will come away with when they hear your
songs.

Trudell: Well, I don't have any hopes about it but what it is,
(laughs) I'm going to go off on a tangent now... When I was in school,
they taught me about Pandora's box of evil. You heard about that. The
gods gave Pandora the box to keep and told her not to open it, because
the seven evils of the world were in it. And she opened it and the
seven evils of the world came out. But then hope came out. Hope was
the eighth thing to come out. They told us then that the hope came out
of the box of evil to help us cope with the evil. But I've always been
wary about it. Because if it's the box of evil and hope came out of
it, then you have to really think about it. (laughs) Why didn't hope
have its own box?

Anyway, beyond that, what I would really like to have happen is, the
music and the writing, it's about making people think. I don't want
people to agree or not agree with me, but to think about things. So
that's what I'm trying to do, just trying to communicate what my
feelings or my perceptions are. If I'm communicating with them at any
level or degree, then maybe it will provoke some thinking. Even if
people connect to something I write in a personal way, but then maybe
it helps them to think about that. Activate our thinking, that's what
I think we need to do.

A ny solutions we have for our individual lives, for the lives of our
community, or for the life of the future, it all centers on how we
think and how we use our intelligence is going to decide all of it. We
have oppressors and we have all these things around us in this
physical world, we have all this happening around us, but in the end,
how we think, how we use our intelligence, this will say how we will
proceed. Thinking is a number one priority, with clarity, seeking
clarity and coherency.

Townsend: Let's talk about Wounded Knee 25 years ago. I've asked
people to talk about where they were when they heard about the
occupation, and what they were doing, and what their reaction was.

Trudell: I was in Nevada. I was with my wife, she was expecting our
first baby. And we were working on this report about Johnson O'Malley
monies. Any state that had reservations on it, the state couldn't tax
the reservation, so the federal government gave Johnson (O'Malley
money in place of taxes, for the Native students. Anyway, it was a big
rip off, the states were just robbing, none of it was going to the
Native youth, or Native usage at all. It was basically going to their
overall school program. We had all this documentation so we wrote this
big report.

And I stayed with her and did that. I knew that this (Wounded Knee)
was going to happen, in advance, but for me at the time, I had reasons
why I stayed where I did. Part of it was what I just explained, and
others I don't want to go into at this time. I was in Nevada, and in
some ways I was glad to see it happen, and in other ways, I was sad to
see it happen. Because I knew it was going to change things. It was
going to change everything.

Townsend: How would it change everything? What were you afraid of or
sad about?

Trudell: It wasn't so much fear, it was just sadness, because I knew
that the government finally had us in a situation, where they could
take us into the court system and tie us up. They could stop our
momentum.

I knew that from now on, we would be in a position of having to defend
ourselves. That was the sad part for me. It was a necessary part, I'm
not trying to put it down or anything. There is a yin and yang, a good
and a bad part to everything that goes on, and this is one of those
things that I knew. We were going to be tied up in the court system
forever.

Townsend: Haven't Native people always been in a place where they have
to defend themselves from the government?

Trudell: Yes, I think so. But I think sometimes... in one sense, with
the occupation of Wounded Knee, we, the people, the Oglala Lakota,
AIM, I'll say we, we did pick a place to make a stand. In one sense,
that stand being here. But when this stand was done, the government
picked the place where we were going to defend ourselves. To me, I
prefer to pick the place that I'm going to defend myself from, as
often as I possibly can. Like in defending, there are levels and ways
one defends oneself.

But after Wounded Knee, all of the energy got put into defending the
defendants. Whereas before we went in there, we were defending the
community.

They narrowed down our energy. Symbolically, even when we were
defending the defendants, symbolically, they were representing the
community. But we had moved from actuality to symbolism. In those
kinds of ways, I'm sad it had to turn this way.

Townsend: What do you think could have been done differently to avoid
that sort of confrontation, or losing control of how you take a stand?

Trudell: We had occupied the BIA building for a week in November of
1972, about three months before Wounded Knee. I think if I would have
done it differently, I'd have defended myself there. I would have done
it in Washington DC. I wouldn't have left the BIA building and said,
'this is going to get settled right here.' Not out in the Plains.

There, again, we would have be in the court system, right, but the
logistics would have been a bit different, because we would have been
in a high media center, there was a lot of things they couldn't have
done, under the cover of darkness, like they did out here. Our allies,
the people we would have been surrounded by, like the black community,
they didn't have war against us. The ranchers do. The whole strategies
would have been different.

To have done it differently, I think, Washington DC was a place a
stand could have been made, because we had everybody there. This is
looking back. If it had been up to me, instinctively, at that time, I
wouldn't have left Washington DC without the fight. That's where the
fight would have taken place, right there in their city.

We can romanticize and glorify, feel good about the things that we
should feel good about, but there is a long death list here. The death
squads operated here. All that stuff happened. A lot of people lost a
lot of things.

Whereas the body count might have been different, if we had had that
battle in another place. This isn't criticism. It's an observation.

Townsend: So, since that time, in your mind, do you think that AIM,
and what happened at Wounded Knee and in Pine Ridge, has AIM acted in
actuality, or more in a symbolic sense?

Trudell: Well, I think, in actuality, things were still going on
through the Oglala fire fight. And after that, the fire fight, and
then the defense of the defendants out of that. I think then, things
started becoming a little bit more symbolic than actual.

By then, by the time of the fire fight and the trials, by 1976-77, by
that time, AIM had become pretty much decentralized. When I look at it
as clearly as I can, by then internal things had started
happening. AIM became more of a fragmented movement, than it was a
unified movement. See, when you become more fragmented, you're
probably going to be dealing more as symbolism than you are
actualities.

Townsend: How about today? Do you think that AIM is still a method
through which people can turn for change or has it gotten to the point
that it is just symbolism?

Trudell: I think AIM is still a way that people can work for change,
but it's not for everybody. For some, yes. The old days are not coming
back, though things can change. In the year 2003, we can't bring back
the AIM of 1973. It's not 1973, that's why we shouldn't be bringing it
back.

When we go through all the things that have happened, I think we need
to learn from it, learn from the mistakes we made, from what we did
improperly. Then the next things we're going to do will be an
extension of what we have already done. Not a repeat. So, I think for
the people that AIM works for, that it will be there for them, for
however long that is, however long it works for them.

AIM as a national organization, the way it was and the national
momentum it had in the early 70s - those days are gone. And I don't
have any regrets about those days being gone.

I think that probably the shift should be' to me, I would shift from
politics into culture and art. That's what I would like to see
happening.

But this isn't about AIM, this is about politics. Any politics we pick
up and follow, they are not our politics. They are alien politics, but
we've been put in the position of having to use those alien politics
to try to accomplish. Those alien politics do not reflect the reality
of who we are, but our culture and art does.

So I think in the long run the reality of who we are and our truths
will come more clearly from our culture and art, than they will
through politics.

Townsend: It does seem that is the way things change, through
musicians and artists, coming together and bringing a message to other
cultures and other people about who they are. I think we saw that when
the US and Russians were terrified of each other, and artists and
musicians started going back and forth. People began to realize that
people in Russia were just as afraid of us, as we were of them, and
that they loved their children, too. Do you think that is the
direction that people need to go, to get away from the entanglement of
politics and move towards art and culture? We can't ignore politics,
because they are there. There will always be people inclined to go
that way. So politics and political movements, they will never
disappear. But I do think, that an equal emphasis, maybe even more
than an equal emphasis, needs to be put on our culture, our art,
expressing the reality of who we are, through that.

Trudell: If you look at it, number one, the politics that we organize
under, they are European. I don't care, in the end they are, the chain
of commands, the structures, the whole thing is European. That's not
our way.

So that means any solutions we are trying to get that way are
undermined, because it's not our way. When you look at that whole
political entity, in that kind of a context, politics are very
territorial. Politics are very much "party" line, at some
point. Politics are very egotistical, and manifests through the
individuals or whatever. When you just look at it, it's a whole lot of
unnecessary confusion, in a whole lot of ways, when we are trying to
express our truths. So I think through our culture and art, is really
the strongest way we can.

I'm not dismissing politics, we have to deal with them because it's
here. Our political structure is here. The deal is, if we going to use
a political structure, then let's recognize that's what we are
doing. It's a tool. It's not an identity, it's a tool.

If you have a flat tire, you take that jack out, you jack the car up,
and take that tire off, and put on the good tire and you put that jack
away, and you always understand that it's a tool. You don't identify
yourself as a jacker.. (laughs) It's a tool you put away.

Too many people get involved in all the politics and they become
politicians. That becomes their identity. If people could just pick up
political movements or politics, and say, 'alright, this is the tool
I'm using, that I'm a human being, I am me, and I'm using this and
that.' But it doesn't happen that way. We become political activists,
so now all of a sudden that becomes our identity, which then limits
our ability to see. When it becomes our identity, in some kind of a
bizarre way, we only see through the limited perception of our
political needs.

Townsend: As you said, the 70s aren't coming back.

Trudell: We barely survived them once. (laughs)

Townsend: Well, how should people pick their battles now? As you said,
if you get too involved in politics, you become a politician.

Trudell: I said you can get involved in politics, but you don't have
to be a politician. It's a I mental thing. People start working on |
political issues and then, at some point, they | say, 'I'm a political
activist,' and that | becomes their identity; that's where the problem
comes.

The question you started to ask, whatever it is that we have to do,
how we're going to approach it, I think we should think it out. Look
at it from every direction. It's almost as if we're stepping out of
our minds, out of ourselves, and looking at the whole thing, with us
in it, as neutrally and as objectively as we can. That way we'll have
some clarity to go after it as clearly as we can, rather than
emotionally, or limited by these identities that we impose on
ourselves around an issue.

It's going to take clarity to see our way through these things, to the
future that is coming.

It is in our best interest to use our intelligence intelligently. But
we don't do that enough; 99.9 percent of us use our intelligence to
manifest our fears, and our insecurities on a daily basis.

We're using our intelligence to be smart, I misuse of our
intelligence. We don't understand that it's a murky cloud of
confusion. Step back, look at this thing, see it as clearly as we can,
and then follow the direction we feel we must follow.

Townsend: You mentioned to face the world that's coming. There is a
lot of proposed legislation right now that really erodes
sovereignty. It seems as if there is a conservative movement within
governments all across the country, that there is not a | better
recognition of tribal sovereignty and treaty issues, but it seems as
if things are moving backwards.

Trudell: Yes. Our enemy here, if one looks at it historically, the
only time that they have ever given anything to us or back to us, was
so that they could take it away later. It was to meet a political need
at a certain time. 'The Indians are raising hell and they got a lot of
public support. So here, we'll pass this legislation, say we're going
to make some concessions to them.'

But then 20 years later, they've already got it figured out how
they're going to take it away. It's not just with Native people. Look
at the citizens of America. We have to understand that. We will gain
nothing from this way of life, this system of America. Anything that
even | represents "right" that they're going to extend to us, is only
so that they can take it away later, because they had to make a
concession to us at this time. But, as soon as they are in a position
that they no longer have to make that concession, then they will take
it away. That has been their history.

That's how our land bases have shrunk.

Look at history. Take the first treaty ever | signed, and all this
land people retained, but somewhere later a court decision said, 'no,
you can take it away.'

And the Indians get too angry, so another court decision says, 'you
can only take this much.' So the Indians get a piece. Then 20 years
later or 50 years later, a new court decision says, 'no, you can take
it all now.'

That's our history. It should not be surprising to us at all. This is
what is going to be our historical experience.

It's been happening to us for so long now, it should almost be a part
of our intuition, or genetic. (laughs)

And to me, in reality, these are cannibals. They want to eat our land,
our lives, they want to eat our future. That's as cannibalistic as it
can possibly get. But it has a form, government, nationhood, or
whatever it calls itself,, but in the end, it's a bunch of cannibals.

Townsend: What can be done? It sounds too bleak.

Trudell: I don't look at it as bleak. I think it's best to recognize
reality for what it is.

What did I say about the cannibals? Let's recognize that reality for
what it is and the reality of who we are. We have intelligence. We
have spirit. We have the ability to think our way through this. I
think it's more optimistic to see how dark it really is, and know what
reality is, and then I won't be fooling myself about what I must do.

Wouldn't it be better to understand the If l m going to do something,
I'm not going to lie to myself about what I'm doing, whether it's
glorious or ugly. I'm not going to fix it up, romanticize it, or make
it clean. If I'm doing it, I'm going to be as honest about it as I
possibly can. If I can't live with it, then I stop. If I lie to
myself, then I'll find ways to live with it and continue to do
it. That's obstructs our clarity.

Always tell ourselves the truth. Learn from mistakes. Don't judge
ourselves. We're not in the judging business. Trust our ability. If we
use our intelligence as coherently as we can, we will create the
solutions.

If we go back in our history, our ancestral understanding, we always
understood we had a purpose to be here. That purpose is to take care
of life the best we can. What has changed is the harshness of the
environment. It was hard, not romantic back then.

The hard now is the predatory civilization that surrounds us. Our
ancestors trusted themselves, they respected themselves. Pride today
is the mask people hide behind when they feel no respect for
themselves.

Trust ourselves. Like ourselves. I like myself. I always don't like
what I do.

There is no collective solution without an individual solution. I
truth in a situation, then you can deal with it more effectively, than
to lie to yourself because you don't want see the truth?

The darkest thing I see for the future is all these people that are
hoping and wishing and don't want to see what's coming. That's the
darkness. But they say they are bringing light and being optimistic,
but to me these people are the ones bringing the darkness because they
don't want to deal with reality. These are the ones who will
perish. These are the ones that will be fed upon and eaten up.

If one really thinks about it, we can romanticize being here before
the white man came. We were free, we could do what we wanted, we had
responsibilities, but I tell you what, you see the storm we're having
right now. It was hard surviving back then. So this is just a
different hard. These cannibals are just a different hard. But they
can be dealt with.

I think if we really understand self-respect, we would look at this
and say, 'this is the challenge and I'm up to meeting it.'

Townsend: So what would you say to people who are struggling to see
what the reality is and what to do next? I think a lot of people feel
overwhelmed by everything, both politically and culturally!

Trudell: Number one, never lie to yourself. Never. If you lie to
yourself, then you don't have your own basis of reality. Always tell
yourself the truth. That's the first step.

Then, think things through, look at it as objectively, clearly and
coherently as we can and think it through. If we don't trust
ourselves, or have enough respect for ourselves to do that, we are in
a lot of trouble.

If we are so far removed from ourselves, and we do not trust ourselves
enough to be able to look at things intelligently, or to tell
ourselves the truth, then we're already on somebody's dinner table,
figuratively speaking. (laughs) I really think that's where it's at.

~
