Take Back the Earth
===================

_Mother Earth is on OUR side! John Trudell 1980(?) Thanks Giving Day speech_

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=q2WEVdNQAxE

17 May 2020

_Transcript from YouTube. Needs editing._

We're faced with a very serious situation in this generation. There
are insane people who wish to rule the world. They wish to continue to
rule the world on violence and repression and we are all the victims
of that violence and repression. We as the indigenous people of the
Western Hemisphere have been resisting this violence in this
oppression for 500 years. We know that the black people have been
resisting it for at least that long, and we know that the white people
have had to endure it thousands of years and now it's come full swing
to this generation that we live in.

Nuclearization of the world you see this cannot be we cannot allow
this to continue to go on we cannot do it see and we cannot expect
that the pro-nuclear oppressor that other side we cannot expect that
they're going to change for us they are going to become more brutal
they're going to become more repressive because it's a matter of
dollars and they're illusionary concepts of power we have to
re-establish our identity we have to understand who we are and where
we fit in the natural order of the world because our oppressor deals
and illusions they tell us that it is power but it is not power they
may have all the guns and they may have all the racist laws and judges
and they may control all the money but that is not power these are
imitations of power and they are only power because in our minds we
allow it to be power but it's all an imitation racism and violent
racism and guns economics the brutality of the American corporate
state way of life is nothing more than violence and repression and it
has nothing to do with power.

It is brutality it is a lack of a saying it's it's it's a lack of a
sane balance the people who have created this and they perpetuate the
system they are out of balance they have made us out of balance they
have come into our minds and have come into our hearts and they
programmed us because we live in this society and they've put us out
of balance and because we are out of balance we no longer have the
power to deal with them they have conquered us as a natural power see
we our power they deal in violence and repression we are power we are
a part of the natural world all the things of the natural world are a
natural part of the creation and feed off the energy of our sacred
mother earth we are power but they have separated us from our
spiritual connection to the earth so people feel powerless we look at
the oppressor and we look at the enemy because they have the most guns
and the most lies and the most money people start to feel powerless.

We are power we are a natural part of the creation we were put here on
the sacred mother earth to serve a purpose and somewhere in the
history of people were forgetting what the purpose is the purpose is
to honor the earth the purpose is to protect the earth the purpose is
to live in balance with the earth the earth is our mother and we will
never free ourselves as human people we will never feel free ourselves
as sexual people we will never free ourselves until we address the
issue of how we live in balance with the earth because all of our
resistance and all of our struggle is hollow it's false it's another
one of those oppressors hypocrisy if we do not look out for the
welfare of the earth first because I do not care who it is any child
that turns on their mother is living in a terrible terrible confusion
the earth is our mother we must take care of the earth they pollute
this oppressor this machine met this machine that has gone mad and run
amuck it is berserk they keep telling us you know progress they keep
telling us face reality well let's deal with reality the reality is
the earth can no longer take this attack we cannot we can no longer
allow this thing to continue where it's polluting the air that's
polluting the water polluting our food.

They pollute the air that pollute the water they pollute our food they
pollute our minds they put us out of balance they have made us be
insecure with ourselves they put us into a situation where we have to
play many roles we got you know we got to be chauvinistic we got to be
some on some kind of a class trip or some kind of an illusionary power
trip we got to play a role see we got to play a role to communicate
with other people we got to go through this charade because they have
attacked our self-confidence they have attacked our self-confidence
and they have made us to listen to them they have made us to believe
that they are power but they are not they are violent and they are
brutal but they are not power we are a natural part of the earth as a
natural part of the earth we have the energy and the power that is the
earth the earth will take care of us if we will remember the earth in
more than just our words if we will remember the earth in our way of
life we are all here to play a role in all of the animals and all of
the life on the earth is playing its proper role except the human
people somehow we are real we are betraying we are betraying our
purpose here and that is why we live in the confusion that we live in
they tell us they want us to believe that we are powerless we are a
natural part of the earth we are an extension of that natural energy
that natural energy which is spirit and which is power power a
blizzard is power an earthquake is power a tornado is power.

These are all things of power that no oppressor Norma Shearer can put
these things of power in a prison no machine age can make these things
of power submit to the Machine age that is natural power and just as
it takes millions and billions of elements to make a blizzard to
happen or to make the earth quake to make the earth to move then it's
going to take millions and billions of us we are power we have that
power we have the potential for that power I remember in the 60s in
the 70s and I heard all this thing about power the people and I never
really understood because everyone was saying power to the people they
were talking about demonstrator they were talking about vote they were
talking about dealing on the terms of the oppressor our power will
come back to us our sense of balance will come back to us when we go
back to the natural way of protecting and honoring the earth if we
have forgotten how to do it and if we think that it looks overwhelming
and we can never accomplish then all we have to do in each of us as an
individual can go out and we can find some spot on the earth that we
could relate to feel that energy feel that power that's where our
safety will come the earth will take care of us.

We have to understand that the American corporate state will not take
care of us they do not care about us maximize their profit that is
where their whole life value was placed upon maximize the profit they
will turn us against each other to maximize the profit because they
have done it in the past nuclear energy.

It's the final assault nuclear energy should tell each and every one
of us that they have gone beyond the reasons of sanity that they are
no longer saying that they no longer deal with the real natural world
because they want to create a radioactivity all right that is going to
make it impossible for the mother earth to take care of our life we
will not destroy the world.

We are arrogant and we are stupid and we are foolish if we believe
that we will destroy the world man has the ability to destroy hit all
of the people's ability to live on the earth but we do not have the
power to destroy the earth the earth will heal itself the earth will
purify itself of us if it takes a billion years to get rid of the
radiation the earth will do it because the earth has that kind of a
time we do not our obligations and our loyalties have to be to the
earth and they have to be to our sense of community and to our people
and to our relations our obligations in our loyalty should not be to a
government that will not take care of our needs our obligations and
loyalty should not be to a government that has proven time and time
again that it is the enemy of the people unless the people are rich in
dollars that has been the consistent history of Western civilization
and the American corporate state government that's reality they are
not our friends they do not care for us we have to face that reality
that we have an enemy we want to talk about nuclear war everybody's
afraid of nuclear award it's going to come between the Americans and
the Russians and the Chinese or whoever but are they not waging
nuclear war on us now when the miners die from cancer from mining that
uranium are they not waging nuclear war with Three Mile Island when
they release that stuff into the air are they not waging nuclear war
when they build all of these nuclear reactors and it's not safe.

Are they not waging nuclear war when they attack the Indian people on
their land militarily attacked the Indian people and racist Lee
attacked the Indian people so that they can get at the natural
resources to feed the radioactive machine that is war and they are
waging it against us they bribe Congress they bribe your elected
officials they terrorize and intimidate your elected officials by
getting the FBI to blackmail them those are acts of war we will have
to come to a time in our lifetime and it will come in our lifetime
when we are going to have to deal with the fact that the enemy has
taken over your government the government is not your ally the
government will use you chew you up and spit you out you think that we
are wrong you think that we are talking unrealistically then go look
at your elders and see what has happened to your elders in your
machine age Society see what kind of respect that they again see what
kind of a voice they are allowed into your society what kind of input
they have see what their final reward of happiness is after working
for this slave state for 30 or 40 years and allowing someone else to
exploit their inner labors what is race is racism is an act of war
sexism is an act of war it's a war against our human dignity and our
rights to self-respect this is the war that they wage their war they
are warlike and we have to understand that America the American
corporate state got to where it's at through the act of war the next
war you want to worry you wouldn't think about a war the next war that
you better be concerned about is the one that they're going to right
here here in the continental United States they have fought many wars
here they fought us all along Z because we said it's ours and you
haven't got a right to it they bought us now you all are claiming that
it's yours under this illusionary concept of private ownership of
property and they're going to fight you but they're going to call it
national security and energy crisis they're gonna call it
constitutional rights they're going to call it judicial proceedings
they're going to nationalize you know your military coup is going to
come by they're going to nationalize the police departments that's
your military coup in the name of violence rising crime but all we
must do is look in the corporate office and see the rising crime that
is taking place there and nobody's going to jail for so we got to
understand that they are arming themselves to wage a war against us
and it's going to be called the war of law and order because they're
twisting it around for 500 years my people have resisted for 500 years
we will resist again if it becomes necessary we want to be able to
relate and communicate with all of the people that are living on this
land but we want to be able to relate and communicate from a position
of truth you all got to face the truth we have had to face it through
500 years of genocide we have had to face the truth we have had to
live the truth we have had to die the truth before we're going to ever
see our evolutionary liberation the people that call themselves
Americans are going to have to face the truth also they tell us to be
realistic that progress means all these things have to happen they
tell us that we can't go back to the old way they tell us be realistic
but there is no old way no new way there is a way of life we must live
in balance with the earth we must do it we have no choice if we allow
ourselves to be apathetic or we allow ourselves to be lied to or
tolerate their lies about what they are doing to the earth then we are
betraying our intention we are betraying our purpose here we cannot
protect that seventh-generation if we do not protect the earth we
cannot protect ourselves if we do not protect the earth the earth
gives us life not the American government the earth gives us life not
the multinational corporate government the earth gives us life we need
to have the earth we must have it otherwise our life will be no more
so we must resist what they do they want to break our spirit they will
do everything and anything to break our spirit our a will to live we
must learn to resist we must learn to see we must learn to look we
must learn to step out of this reactionary ISM all of our lives
they've had control of us through their schools and through their TV
their electronic media they had control of us all of our lives.

They have programmed us they have made us become reactionary we don't
think we react to what they do we don't think we react to everything
that they do we react to it they're setting us up in the 80s because
they know consistently throughout the past the people have always
reacted to what they have due to their manipulations of circumstance
they know that the people always react they're counting on it in the
80s scene they outnumber us with guns they outnumber us with money
they outnumber us with boats they control all the machines to count
the votes they got it all stacked in their favor.

Except there's a key the key is we must start thinking and stop
reacting they have the oppressor has no thinkers they have no
philosophers it's all scientific it's all economic it's all
manipulative they have no thinkers you go look and you deal with the
enemy and what the enemy does is you the enemy will send somebody out
on the street to hit you in the head and the guy says I'm only taking
my orders and if you're if you can come from a position of strength to
this guy that's it you in the head and say hey you've got to stop
hitting me in the head we want to talk then he says well I have to go
to my superior to see they have no thinkers either if we will start to
think and we will learn to see to see what reality really is we will
outnumber them through the thinking process we will take our minds
away from them because through their manipulation of our mind they
control our spirit and they know this is true.

They tell us see they want us to believe that we are powerless they
want us to believe that we are becoming overwhelmed that they can
overwhelm us you see but they're paranoid they are more paranoid than
any of us are no matter what happens to us because see they have to
put people in here to come and listen to what we're saying so they can
go back and tell so they're afraid they're afraid because they know
we're talking about reality now why are they afraid they are afraid
because they know that they are dealing with the illusions of power
which are based on the realities of violence and brutality.

They're afraid see they don't want people to think they don't want
people to be talking and they don't want people to think about what
they talk about because they know they've known it all along that they
built their whole thing on illusions and because they have drawn us
into giving this illusionary world all this power they have taken our
power away from us because we believe in the illusions it's going to
be real hard for us to get our way back we have to deal with the
economics we have to deal with the politics we have to deal with the
whole nuclear madness but we're going to have to purify and cleanse
our spirit a little bit our resistance movements we have to think real
seriously about movements see movements make up a resistance we have
to be very careful and as how we organize because they're counting on
us to react the same way we did in the 60s and the 70s do you think
that this energy crisis and you think that this economic inflation
thing you think it's an accident you think it just happened they saw
in the 60s that the American people were becoming more liberal because
they were becoming more affluent and because they were becoming more
affluent they were starting to say well equal rights for the blacks
the young people are starting to say well it doesn't matter what you
look like we all have a Worth and then that led up to where everybody
started saying the war in Vietnam is wrong the other side they saw
that all of these conclusions were based on a level of a fluency that
was reaching the average American and the average American was
becoming more liberal istic and they're thinking because they were
getting this a fluency so they're getting even they've had a
redistribution of the wealth they did it through energy through oil to
make the people more poor they did it that's what Watergate was all
about well everybody was looking at Richard Nixon and did he or didn't
he.

They had a redistribution of the wealth in the price of gasoline and
bread went up 100 percent see now if you didn't have Nixon to look at
and be concerned about then maybe you all would not have allowed them
to raise these prices see but by the time they got the prices raised
by one hundred percent it was too late for the American people to ever
recover and deal with it they're getting even for the 60s and the 70s
count on it it's not an accident you've got a racist class sexist
ruling class power structure that exists in the world and composed of
heavy industrialist the people who are who are part machine and they
intend that they're going to keep their hold on the world economics we
live in an in a machine world an industrialized world we got to deal
with race two-thirds of the world's natural resources are on non-white
land because that's where two-thirds of the world population is
one-third of the world's resources because of technology coming out of
the white land one-third the world's resources are almost totally used
up but technology spreads like any disease technology spread so
there's 2/3 there's two-thirds with majority the world's population
they got all the natural resources so at some point in the immediate
future they're going to have all the technology which makes them the
new machine power and it changes the whole thing around but like they
did to us when they wanted our land in the otice they used their
technology to stay ahead they came and they gave us a few Winchester
repeating rifles because they had Gatling guns and then they could
justify their murders because America the hypocrisy is they must arm
you before they murder you so that was how they went about it we look
at today and now by creating a dependency on nuclear power nuclear
energy by creating a dependency upon that there's only a handful of
countries that control the mass the mechanism of mass production of
this all the countries in the world don't and you watch where the
nuclear bombs are going they're going to places like Africa in the
Middle East and they're gonna give some of these people some bombs in
the hopes and they'll even have some of these people drop one of these
atom bombs on each other one of these days see they can afford to hand
the bombs out there because these nations have no capability of
delivering the bomb back to where it came from be it the Soviet Union
or America they create a dependency on nuclear energy then everybody
has to adjust their needs seeing we stay dependent and in through the
end of it before it's done they intend to use their nuclear energy to
be able to step into the net into the third world and take the natural
resources it's all got to do with economics and racist power trips
that have been in existence since before Christ there's no need for it
because of electricity you know for us to survive and resist we are
going to have to understand and recognize that we are energy because
we are a natural part of the creation and if we are going to
effectively stand up to our enemy we're going to have to be able to do
it based upon our connection to the real truth to reality our enemies
abusing is abusing the earth our enemy abuses us abuses all of the
sacred things of life but we are an extension of the earth we are
energy and we are spirit before we will be strong enough to fight and
stand up to the enemy we are going to have to evaluate how we use our
own energy.

Are we misusing our own energy are we misusing ourselves because we
got to deal with that before we can deal with being misused by someone
else alternative energy we are alternative energy we are it we have
power we must gear our for a long struggle we must never give up hope
we must never turn our back on and say we're not going to make it
because those who turned their back and say we're not going to make it
and they're not going to that's it for them but the spirit of the
people the spirit of the people the spirit of the earth we live in a
natural world we go through we go through lives all of our ancestors
who were here before us all of our relations who were here with us and
went into the spirit world see they didn't go to heaven or hell
they're here there are spirit power we connect with them they will
help us they will help us to survive this thing this madness that is
coming this *machine madness* that is being imposed upon all of us what
we must do is we must seriously think and consider our situation today
as human beings because we're talking about sexism and ageism and
racism and classism we're talking about a nuclear attack against the
earth we're talking about a lot of things they want to confuse us with
nuclear bombs they want to confuse us with the draft they want to
confuse us with a whole economics but we must put take a little bit of
time every day anyway and put some of that confusion to the side and
think about who we are in relationship to the earth the earth has the
ability to heal and the earth has the ability to help us the earth is
power we're looking to the wrong source for our power and the more we
look to the wrong source the more powerless we become and they will
attack you take that flower power movement that was in the middle 60s
these were young white people coming out of Middle America and these
were the ones that were saying it doesn't matter what she looked like
or how you dress or how much money you make and they became a threat
to America so America attacked him America attacked them with LSD and
speed and heroin and drugs America took them and discredited them and
said said they're no longer flowerpower children who come from your
middle-class homes there are drug addicts and it had a generation gap
see but everybody was so caught up in mind expansionism and idealism
they said while the LSD is a good thing for us and we really want it
because it helps us to grow and see but I consider it to be an act of
war the CIA was experimenting with LSD for specifically for that
purpose to use it in chemical warfare and they saw a whole segment of
the American public was turning turning into a consciousness that
talked about true human life values so they dropped their LSD bomb
he's here because mind expansion and consciousness alteration was
taking place that's what the civil rights movement was that's what the
flower power movement was that's what the anti-war movement was there
was people whose minds and her consciousness was expanding and
starting to become more realistic so they turned around and they
dropped a few things on us to divert our energy so we have we have to
be very careful we must always think we must always look to see
because there's an answer for everything that is going on if we're
willing to take the time to look for it and to see it we are power we
are energy we are spirit we are the people we want to be free we want
our liberation then we must take the responsibility that goes with
liberation and freedom and that responsibility is is to be able to
take the time to analyze and to think and to feel things out to their
logical conclusion feel stay with these things to the end to the good
conclusion we cannot come and get involved in this for a year or two
years we must pick our way of life and we must live to it and no
matter how hard anybody here thinks that it is you think about all of
our relatives that are locked up in prison cells think about how hard
it is for them but they're strong enough to endure well we're out here
we should be strong enough to endure also think about all the women
and children and men the people that have had to endure centuries and
centuries of oppression strong enough to endure we must do that we
must find a way to communicate with each other we must find a way to
have a more open human compassion we must go back to the ways of the
earth it's the only way we're going to protect the unborn we must
never quit we must be resistance we must build a resistance that
passes on the information in the knowledge of our mistakes to the next
generation we must not become too movement oriented where we get
caught up in our own arrogance because we're chasing a cause we must
build our power and we must understand that we build strong we must
build to survive not to change the politics right now we must build to
survive because pretty soon pretty soon a lot of these conversations
will not they will not allow them to take place anymore pretty soon
we're going to have to be looking at each other in a way where we're
either or were allies there's going to come a time in our lifetime and
many of us will see it there's going to come a time when we're going
to have to run to each other for safety that time is coming and anyone
who refuses to believe it anyone who still believes the American lie
that it can't happen here then you have our sympathy and we do not
mean to offend you stay with us as long as you can when you see it
start to happen then you make your decision because Reagan Reagan's
not your enemy Reagan's just he's an actor he's saying the words that
somebody is putting into his hands to say he's reading his script and
they got this thing well planned and they intend that they're going to
break the backbone of resistance in America and are going to do it
under so-called energy crisis I don't know what the answers are or the
solutions but we know that let's pray every day we could pray we could
pray to the earth and we could pray to the ways that we believe and
pray for some kind of understanding and take a little bit of time to
get to know ourselves and be comfortable with ourselves.

Take a little time see because the enemy has come in to us the enemy
has the enemy is inside of us the enemy exploits our Eagle exploits
our needs in our wants you know there are things in this world that we
need to have to survive and there are things in this world that we
want because we want them we are going to have to relearn the
difference we're going to have to learn to take what we need even if
it means giving up some of the excess that we want and if we cannot
give too much to a way of life.

I thank you for your time.

~
