We Are Power
============

by John Trudell

July 18, 1980

https://www.historyisaweapon.com/defcon1/trudellwearepower.html

_Captured 18 May 2020_

The largest gathering in recent years of indigenous peoples and
their supporters took place in the Paha Sapa (Black Hills) of South
Dakota during the baking-hot late summer of 1980.

For those who attended—and participants came from as far afield as
Nicaragua, the Pacific, northern Europe, Canada, South America and
throughout the United States—it seemed to signify an end to the
compartmentalised, often divisive, single-issue movements of the
1970s, and the beginning of new international alliances between
previously disparate forces. Red-neck ranchers rubbed shoulders with
radical "redskins," white "green movement" activists with native
practitioners of alternative technology, militant left-wing political
adherents with anarcho-pacifists.

Called the Survival Gathering, and organized by a unique coalition of
whites and native Americans (Black Hills Alliance), in a brief six
days scores of workshops and plenary sessions were held covering
virtually every aspect of land-use, multi-corporate control, political
oppression, indigenous self-determination, alternative health, energy
and education.

At the opening session of the Gathering, American Indian Movement
co-founder John Trudell, in a remarkable address, drew together
various strands of the emergent peoples' movements of the last 20
years and put them firmly in the context of an earth-based liberation
which indigenous communities have practiced—against tremendous
odds—for hundreds of years."

_from The Indigenous Voice: Visions and Realities, edited by Roger Moody_

I'd like to thank you all for coming to this place, and I'd like to
give thanks for being welcomed here myself. And I would like to talk
tonight in honor of all of us in the struggle who have lost our
relations to the Spirit World. I would like to talk in honor of the
wind, one of the natural elements. This is a survival gathering and
one of the things I hope you all learn while you're here is ... to
appreciate the energy and power that the elements are, tha t of the
sun, the rain and the wind. I hope you go away from here understanding
that this is power, the only real, true power. This is the only real,
true connection we will ever have to power, our relationship to Mother
Earth.

We must not become confused. We must not become confused and deceived
by their illusions. There is no such thing as military power. There is
only military terrorism. There is no such thing as economic
power. There is only the economic within these illusions so we will
believe they hold power in their hands. But they do not. All they know
how to do is act in a repressive, brutal way.

The power. We are a natural part of the earth. We are an extension of
the earth; we are not separate from it. We are part of it. The earth
is our mother. The earth is a spirit, and we are an extension of that
spirit. We are spirit. We are power. They want us to believe that we
have to believe in them, that we have to assume these consumer
identities and these political identities, these religious identities
and these racial identities. They want to separate us from our
power. They want to separate us from who we are. Genocide.

Genocide is just an intellectual way of saying murder because we live
in a so-called "civilized," industrialized world. And because this
world is allegedly civilized and allegedly has laws, they can't go out
and call an act of murder, murder any more. They call it genocide to
throw another illusion in our eyes. And they have limited our ability
to see the necessity for our survival because they want us to believe
that genocide just means physical extinction. We must consider the
spiritual genocide that they commit against us: the spiritual genocide
that white people have been victimized for thousands of years, the
spiritual genocide that told them not to respect the earth—the
spiritual genocide that told them not to respect the life that is the
earth—but to pay all their tribute through the churches to god and
heaven, that heaven would take care of them in the afterlife. They
tried to take and suppress our natural identity, our natural spiritual
connection to the earth.

We must move to the time when we truly understand our connection to
real power because these people who deal with illusions and
imitations, these men who have attempted to "improve upon" nature,
they want to keep us confused. They want to keep us confused with
sexism and agism, racism and class. They want to keep us in confusion
so that we will continue to believe in one lie after another as they
program them into our minds and into our society.

There is no hope for the American political system. The ruling class,
the exploitative one percent who control world economics today, are
not going to change under the existing political rules. They are going
to lie to us and they are going to create the illusion of "changes,"
and they are going to push one face after another in front of us,
making promises. We have to understand our role as a natural power. We
have to understand that when our oppressor treats us this way and do
these things to us, we allow him to do it so long as we accept his
lies. As long as we make excuses for his lies, as long as we tolerate
his brutality, then we allow him to mistreat us. We have been allowing
it too long. That's genocide.

When I go around America and I see the bulk of the white people, they
do not feel oppressed. They feel powerless. When I go amongst my own
people, we do not feel powerless. We feel oppressed. We do not want to
make the trade. We see the physical genocide they are attempting to
inflict upon our lives and we understand the psychological genocide
they have already inflicted upon their own people ... that this is the
trade-off they want us to make for survival, that we become
subservient to them, that we no longer understand our real connection
to power, our real connection to the earth.

Power. They can't stop the wind and they can't stop the rain. They
can't stop the earthquake and the volcano and the tornado. They can't
stop power. We are a spiritual connection to the earth. As individuals
we have power and, collectively, we have the same power as the
earthquake, the tornado, and the hurricanes. We have that
potential. We have that connection.

We must be willing in our lifetime to deal with reality. It's not
revolution we're after; it's liberation. We want to be free of a value
system that's being imposed upon us. We do not want to participate in
that value system. We don't want to change that value system. We want
to remove it from our lives forever. Liberation. We want to be
free. But, in order for us to be free, we have to assume our
responsibilities as power, as individuals, as spirit, as people. We
are going to have to work at it. We are going to have to be committed
to it. We must never underestimate our enemy. Our enemy is committed
against us 24 hours a day. They use 100% of their efforts to maintain
their materialistic status quo. 100% of their effort goes into
deceiving us and manipulating us against each other. We have to devote
our lives. We have to make our commitment. We have to follow a way of
life that means we are going to resist forever.

In the 1980s, we have to start working more realistically with a
resistance consciousness. A resistance, something we can pass on as
strength to coming generations. A resistance where organizational egos
do not get in the way, a resistance where the infiltrators and the
provocateurs and the liars and the betrayers and the traitors do not
get in the way. We will not get our liberation if we do not seriously
analyze the experiences of our own lifetimes. The other side, the
enemy, has studied. They understand what we were up to in the
1960s. They understand what we wanted in the early '70s. They have
studied us.

They create certain events, and they manipulate the economics, and
they manipulate the circumstances because they want to smash us the
same way they did in the '60s, so they can come in and smash our
movements. We must become of a resistance consciousness. We must say
that, "We will not allow you to smash us, even if it means that we
have to deal with that part of you that you planted in me. We will not
allow you to smash us. This is part of our obligation to the
earth. Only by fulfilling our obligation to the earth can we fulfill
our obligation to the people. Only by understanding our connection to
the earth can we create a fair system that's going to be good to the
people."

We must go beyond the arrogance of human rights. We must go beyond the
ignorance of civil rights. We must step into the reality of natural
rights because all the natural world has a right to existence. We are
only a small part of it. There can be no trade-off. We are the
people. We have the potential for power. We must not fool
ourselves. We must not mislead ourselves. It takes more than good
intentions. It takes commitment. It means that at some point in our
lives we are going to have to decide that we have a way of life that
we follow, and we are going to live that way of life, even when our
enemies totally surround us, even when our enemies act against us with
brutality and harshness, with lies and bribes. We are going to have to
stand up to brutality and harshness, lies and bribes. We are going to
have to stand with our way of life. That is the only solution there is
for us. We cannot reach a point in our lives where we're going to sit
back and say, "Well, we'll make this compromise with the other side."

They have every intention that they are going to use the
nuclearization of the world to colonize you all. There is a new Indian
this time. The new Indian is white. They don't need you any more
because they've got an entire potential world market with millions and
millions of consumers. So, all the lies they've dangled in front of
your faces, well, they're going to start pulling back on these lies a
bit, and they're going to start slapping you all with a bit of
reality: the reality that there are not political freedoms in America;
the reality that there is not religious freedom in America. You all
are going to have to deal with reality and stop making excuses for
America.

We Indians are going to have to act as runners and messengers. We are
going to have to run and act as teachers. We are going to have to talk
to all the people who will listen to us about what we believe, what it
is that we know to be right. We're going to have to find ways to
become a communication of ourselves. They are afraid of us. We must
always remember that every time they have to create a system built
upon traitors coming in and betraying you, any time they have to build
that system, it is because they understand they have a weakness. And
if we persist in our struggle and become dedicated in our resistance
... we will take them down through that weakness.

It doesn't matter how many jail cells they build. It doesn't matter
how many racist judges, sexist judges, agist judges and class judges
they have. It doesn't matter how many of their side they put into
illusory positions of "respectability." It doesn't matter what they
throw at us because we make the difference. We make the decision. We
are power.

They deal in illusions, and that's all it is. We must not be
afraid. We must never allow fear to be a part of our life. We must
always deal with reality. They have been able to use the element of
fear to control the masses of people through murder and making the
rest of the people afraid of being murdered. But what good is it to
live on this sacred place, what good is it to be here if we can't live
with dignity and respect? We are here just for our own purposes any
more than we are here for them.

We have to understand the implications of slavery and that America is
a slave state. One way to understand this is that all of you grew up
and left your homes to seek your independence, and immediately went
into debt. And there went your independence. Slavery is
slavery. Whether you are an indentured servant or in debt, or whether
you are in chains, slavery is slavery. We have to evaluate our
values. We have to start stepping away from the concepts they forced
us to learn. We must share knowledge. We must not be drawn into their
traps. Whatever we do, we must do as a resistance; whatever we do as a
people, whatever we do in the name of the people and the earth, we
must do this with humility and with gratefulness for what we are and
what we have. But we should not do it with pride.

Because John Wayne is proud, the marines are proud. People flying B-52
bombers are proud. How are we going to get our liberation if we take
on their characteristics? It is time for us to think. We hate to think
about the terminology we use, [but] we must think about the thoughts
that go with our terminology.

We must make our resistance totally complete. There must be no last
way, half way measures. We have to learn to put up and deal with the
hard times just like we enjoy the good times. We have to learn and
understand that hard times are necessary for the good times to be
here. We have to learn and understand that all the struggle we will go
through in our lives does not mean we are losing. We have to
understand that they want us to be lazy in our minds and lazy in our
spirits and lazy in our thinking. But the nature of the People of the
Earth has always been one of struggle. It has always been. As the
indigenous people of the western hemisphere, we learned to struggle
and live because of the struggle of our living. We learned to live
with harmony and respect for Mother Nature. We never forgot who we
were ...

We always had to struggle, so let's not fool ourselves and try to make
ourselves quit what we believe just because it's going to be
hard. Let's struggle for a purpose. Let's struggle for the freeing of
the earth because only by freeing the earth, and those who would
attack the earth, can we be free ourselves. It is the only way we can
do it.

There have been many social revolutions in America. There have been
many social organizations. There have been women's rights movements;
there have been equal rights movements; there have been union
movements. And look who's still controlling our lives. We've got to
deal with that reality. The people have risen before. The people have
spoken before. The people have tried before. But somewhere they did
not put it all together, the reason being that they always attempted
to change the social conditions of America without addressing the
issue of our relationship to the land. [Yet] they cannot create a
repressive military regime without the land. They cannot exploit
economics without the land ...

We must not take them on just on the fact that we are going to own the
land ... Our concern must be for the land as well as ourselves. If we
do not use our minds to think of our coming generations, they will win
their psychological genocide against us. We must not become
discouraged. We must never quit...If they stop us one way, then we
must find another way. They are afraid of consistency.

They always throw issues at us to keep us jumping from one issue to
another. They throw lies and illusions in front of us. We must learn
from the Vietnam War. The white American people said they were against
war. That's what the people said. Then they went and listened to their
lying politicians, and their lying politicians said, "Okay, we will
help you. We will declare peace." And so the lying politicians got the
people to settle for withdrawal from Vietnam as being peace. And
meanwhile my people were going through a war right here, right here on
the Pine Ridge Reservation. And all that went unnoticed in the
celebrations over peace being declared. The lie was sunk in, and the
American people accepted the lie.

When the black people were struggling for what became civil rights,
really they were talking about equality. The politicians stepped in
and said, "We will help you all." And the black people settled for
civil rights, which is only part of life. Now the politicians come
talking again: "We are going to help you with nuclear power." We've
got to think about our past experience.

If we are going to consciously become power and use our power
correctly ... we are going to have to find a way to communicate our
thoughts and our resistance and our consciousness which will not
accept the nuclearization of the earth, that this goes against
everything we know and believe in, that this time we draw the line. We
have to take the initiative. We can no longer afford to become and
remain reactionary ... We should work within our movements, but we
must always remember these are parts of a total resistance. The
resistance is the one thing at this point in our generation which can
give life to the coming generations ...

When we talk about the other side and energy, we can only place so
much responsibility on the shoulders of the enemy. And we do have an
enemy. We can call him Jimmy Carter or Ronald Reagan, or we can call
it the Trilateral Commission. We can call them anything we want, but
we've got to come to the reality that they are the enemy because our
friends and the people who love us would not do this to us. So they
are the enemy. We have to deal with this reality: "the enemy." There
must be this consciousness that goes into our minds and we will start
to act accordingly. And we must know what responsibilities we must
place upon the enemy, and what responsibilities we must take upon
ourselves. Because, when we talk about "the energy crisis," we must
remember that we are energy ... We are energy, so we must, if we are
going to go out with the truth and spiritual connection behind us when
we stand against our enemy—and we accuse the enemy of misusing energy,
and we accuse him of abusing it—then we better think real hard about
how we misuse it ourselves. Because we are energy. We have to deal
with that.

We are energy, and its how we use ourselves that allows the enemy to
misuse us. This resistance and this struggle for survival must be
total, absolutely complete. There are no half measures. They have
interfered in our lives since the moment we were born. Look at
America. You have to pay to be born, and you have to pay to be
buried. That tells you a lot about our freedom. And if they've gotten
it into our consciousness to accept that, then we've got a lot of work
to do. We really do. But we have the ability to change it because we
are a natural part of the earth ... because we were here. The earth
did not put useless things here. We are a natural part of the
creation.

They have been attacking indigenous people, and they have been
misusing white people, and they want to push us all into a position
where all we think about is ourselves. They want us to forget the
earth, just like they used early christianity to make the christians
forget the earth. They want to do it to all of us again, in this
generation. They want to isolate us and call us names like "communist"
and "anarchist" and "terrorist" and "criminal." They want to attack
us. They want to use terrorism to intimidate us. We must build a
resistance in our hearts that says we will not accept it, we will
never accept it.

As to the indigenous peoples, I don't know how you all relate. But
indigenous people, understanding power, we are the spirit. We are a
natural part of the earth. And all our ancestors, and all our
relations who have gone to the Spirit World, they are herewith
us. They have power. They will help us. They will help us to see, if
we are willing to look. We are not separated from them because there
is no place to go. This is our place, the earth. This is our
mother. We will not go away from our mother.

No matter what they do to us, no matter how they strike at us, every
time they do it, we must continue. But we must never become
reactionary. The one thing that has always bothered me about
revolution is that every time I have met the revolutionaries they have
acted simply out of hatred for the oppressor. What we must do is act
out of love for our people. No matter what they ever do to us, we must
always act out of love for the people and for the earth. We must never
react out of hatred for those who have no sense.

The hidden hand of the market will never work without a hidden fist —
McDonald's cannot flourish without McDonnell Douglas ...'  —Thomas
L. Friedman, New York Times

~

