American Indian activist, poet John Trudell dies at 69
======================================================

by Robert Jablon

8 December 2015

AP Newswire

https://apnews.com/6725b86e3382435ca02b0c3bb855c5fa/american-indian-activist-poet-john-trudell-dies-69

LOS ANGELES (AP) — John Trudell, who was a spokesman for American
Indian protesters during their 1969 occupation of Alcatraz Island and
later headed the American Indian Movement, died Tuesday. He was 69.

Trudell, who also was a poet and actor, died of cancer at his home in
Santa Clara County in Northern California, where he was surrounded by
friends and family, said Cree Miller, a trustee for his estate.

In some of his last words, Trudell said expressions of concern and
love for him have been “like a fire to my heart,” according to Miller.

“Thank you all for that fire,” he said.

“John Trudell and his family ask for people to celebrate love and
celebrate life. He asked that people pray and celebrate in their own
way in their own communities,” Miller said in a statement.

Trudell was born Feb. 15, 1946, in Omaha, Nebraska. His father was
Santee Sioux, and Trudell grew up near the Santee Sioux Reservation.

He became involved in Native American activism after a stint in the
U.S. Navy, serving in a destroyer off the Vietnamese coast.

In 1969, Trudell joined American Indians who had occupied Alcatraz
Island in San Francisco Bay to demand that the former federal prison
should be given to Native Americans under treaty rights.

Trudell, who studied radio and broadcasting at a college in San
Bernardino, California, became spokesman for the group that called
itself the United Indians of All Tribes, and he ran a radio broadcast
from the island called Radio Free Alcatraz.

The protest eventually dwindled, and the last demonstrators were
removed by federal officers after 19 months.

Trudell went on to serve as national chairman of the activist American
Indian Movement from 1973 to 1979.

In 1979, while Trudell was demonstrating in Washington, D.C., his
pregnant second wife, Tina Manning, three children and mother-in-law
were killed in a fire at her parents’ home on the Duck Valley Indian
Reservation in Nevada.

Trudell and others long suspected government involvement, but the
cause of the fire was never determined.

Trudell later had a relationship with Marcheline Bertrand, the mother
of actress Angelina Jolie, before her 2007 death from cancer. She was
an executive producer of a 2005 documentary about him called
“Trudell.”

Trudell was a prolific poet, combining spoken words and music on more
than a dozen albums, including one released earlier this year.

His fans included Kris Kristofferson, who paid tribute to Trudell with
the 1995 song “Johnny Lobo,” a tune Kristofferson still frequently
performs live.

Trudell also acted in several movies, including 1992′s “Thunderheart”
starring Val Kilmer and 1998′s “Smoke Signals” starring Adam Beach.

In 2012, Trudell and singer Willie Nelson co-founded Hempstead Project
Heart, which advocates for legalizing the growing of hemp for
industrial purposes as a more environmentally sound alternative to
crops used for clothing, biofuel and food.

~
