John Trudell KNACKA Biography
=============================

By KNACKAtv

6 September 2013

Portland, Oregon

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jDPC5wWMp2Y

John Trudell is an acclaimed poet, national recording artist, actor
and activist whose international following reflects the universal
language of his words, work and message. Trudell (Santee Sioux) was a
spokesperson for the Indian of All Tribes occupation of Alcatraz
Island from 1969 to 1971. He then worked with the American Indian
Movement (AIM), serving as Chairman of AIM from 1973 to 1979. In
February of 1979, a fire of unknown origin killed Trudell's wife,
three children and mother-in-law. It was through this horrific tragedy
that Trudell began to find his voice as an artist and poet, writing,
in his words, "to stay connected to this reality."

In 1982, Trudell began recording his poetry to traditional Native
music and in 1983 he released his debut album Tribal Voice on his own
Peace Company label. Trudell then teamed up with the late legendary
Kiowa guitarist Jesse Ed Davis. Together, they recorded three albums
during the 1980's. The first of these, AKA Graffiti Man, was released
in 1986 and dubbed the best album of the year by Bob Dylan. AKA
Graffiti Man served early notice of Trudell's singular ability to
express fundamental truths through a unique mix of poetry, Native
music, blues and rock. Since that time, Trudell has released seven
more albums plus a digitally re-mastered collection of his early Peace
Company cassettes. His 2002 CD, Bone Days, was executive produced by
Academy Award winning actress Angelina Jolie and released on the
Daemon Records label.

His double album, Madness & The Moremes, showcases more than five
years of new music and includes special Ghost Tracks of old favorite
Trudell tunes made with legendary Kiowa guitarist Jesse Ed Davis. This
internet only release offers a full range of classic Trudell poetry --
there are lyrics filled with penetrating insight and others with knock
out humor, all put to some of the best music Bad Dog has ever made
together.

Crazier Than Hell is the latest offering from John Trudell and Bad
Dog. 17 new and old songs continue the thread of love, life, reality
and responsibility that runs through all of Trudell's
presentations. Rocking, bluesy, psychedelic tunes flow naturally and
coherently from start to finish. This is Trudell and Bad Dog's most
important work to date.

In addition to his dozen recordings, Trudell has published three books
of poetry, including his latest, a collection of all his works
entitled Lines from a Mined Mind: The Words of John Trudell. He has
also appeared in several feature films (Thunderheart, Smoke Signals,
On Deadly Ground and Dreamkeeper) as well as a number of
documentaries. He is also the subject of an award-winning documentary
on his life, Trudell, which premiered at the 2005 Sundance Film
Festival.

~
