John Trudell
============

Poetry Foundation

https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poets/john-trudell

John Trudell

1946–2015    

John Trudell was a Santee Dakota activist, performance artist, actor,
and poet, was born Omaha, Nebraska and he spent his early years living
on the Santee Reservation in northern Nebraska. He was an early member
of and spokesman for the Native American rights movement and helped to
promote a spoken word style that honors Native American oral
traditions. 

Trudell's life of activism began in 1969-70, when he was part of a
group of people who occupied Alcatraz Island, claiming that the newly
abandoned government property should revert back to the Indian
Nations. He became heavily involved in indigenous human rights efforts
in the 1970s, serving as chairman of the American Indian Movement
(AIM) from 1973 to 1979. Concerned with his activism, the FBI
developed a 17,000-page file on him. 

Trudell's poetry and performance developed simultanesously in the
1980s. He began setting his poetry to Native American music in 1982,
the year is first chapbook, Living in Reality, was published. The
following year, his debut album Tribal Voice appeared. His musical
work garnered him supporters such as Bob Dylan, Willie Nelson, Jackson
Browne, Bonnie Raitt, and John Fogerty. Many of Trudell's other 14
albums, including _AKA Graffiti Man_ (1986), _But This Isn’t El
Salavador_ (1987), and _Heart Jump Bouquet_ (1987), received critical
acclaim. His album _Bone Days_ (2001) was produced by Angelina
Jolie. His lyrics are collected in the book _Lines from a Mined Mind_
(2008, Fulcrum Press).
 
Trudell also began to appear in films, including _Thunderheart_
(1992), _On Deadly Ground_ (1994), _Extreme Measures_ (1996), and
_Smoke Signals_ (1998), and the documentary films _Incident at Oglala_
(1992) and _Trudell_ (2005).

He died in 2015.

~
