Remembering the Life and Legacy of John Trudell
===============================================

By Matika Wilbur

_Noted activist, poet and Native thinker John Trudell walked on
December 8 at the age of 69._

Alex Jacobs

Sep 23, 2017


Remembering the Life and Legacy of John Trudell
John Trudell was a Santee Dakota activist, artist, actor, and poet,
who led a life dedicated to indigenous human rights, land and language
issues

John Trudell, noted activist, poet and Native thinker, walked on
December 8, 2015, after a lengthy bout with cancer. His family
included some of his last messages to Indian country in a press
release. Among them: “I want people to remember me as they remember
me.”

John Trudell was a Santee Dakota activist, artist, actor, and poet,
who led a life dedicated to indigenous human rights, land and language
issues. He helped spark a spoken word movement that is a continuation
of Native American oral traditions. He walked on December 8 at the age
of 69.

Born on February 15, 1946 in Omaha, he spent his early years living on
the Santee Reservation in northern Nebraska. His father was Santee and
his mother was of Mexican Indian heritage. He had a normal life until
his mother died at age 6, and the new rock and roll music resonated
with him from ages 9-12. He said high school was not good for him and
would enlist in the U.S. Navy from 1963 until 1967, to get away. He
married Fenicia “Lou” Ordonez in 1968 in California, briefly attended
college, thinking he would go into radio and broadcasting.

Everything changed in 1969 when Native American students and
organizers, Trudell among them, occupied Alcatraz Island from November
20, 1969 to June 11, 1970. That group became “Indians of All Tribes,”
and they issued the manifesto, We Hold the Rock, and eventually the
book, Alcatraz is Not an Island. The Alcatraz Occupation became an
incubator for the nascent Native American rights movement, including
the American Indian Movement (AIM) in Minneapolis. The legal basis for
this occupation was the Treaty of Fort Laramie of 1868, which said
that any abandoned federal property would revert to the Indian
Nations. This treaty’s legality would also inspire many more actions
across Indian country. Trudell has always maintained that all these
political actions were not just moral, ethical issues but were legal
issues, according to Native treaty rights and federal trust
responsibilities.

Trudell used his broadcasting experience on the airwaves of “Radio
Free Alcatraz” (a clip from the program can be heard on the 2005
documentary Trudell). His marriage would end during this period as he
became a leading Native spokesman attracting national attention. The
negotiations over Alcatraz, the proposed Indian Center and the
occupation itself fell apart in 1971, but so many names of Native
activists, organizers, artists, writers and actors from that time
would become prominent in the ensuing struggles, movement and
documentation.

RELATED: Warriors of Our Time: Remembering John Trudell

Events would cascade from actions related to the Raymond Yellow
Thunder beating in 1972, to the nationally organized cross-country
caravan Trail of Broken Treaties in 1972 that ended with the
occupation of the Bureau of Indian Affairs building in Washington,
D.C. and the issuance of The 20 Points Manifesto. The scattering of
activists after the BIA take-over led to AIM actions at the Custer
County Courthouse, followed by the 1973 Liberation/Occupation of
Wounded Knee village by AIM and the Oglala Sioux Civil Rights
Organization. In 1973, Trudell became the national spokesperson for
AIM, a position that he held until 1979.

Everybody seemed to have a personal relationship with Trudell, even if
you met him only once. Some folks who never met him still have that
same feeling that he knew their story because they could hear it
resonate in his songs, poetry, and movies. While poetry editor at
Akwesasne Notes, I reviewed Trudell’s first poetry chapbook, Living in
Reality: Songs Called Poems (1982). It was a simple chapbook produced
straight from “Indian country,” on Franklin Avenue, Minneapolis. My
review basically stated, don’t worry that it didn’t sound like
“modern” poetry, Trudell had found a voice and had tapped into the
collective consciousness; that no matter how well this collection of
poems sold, Trudell’s voice would be big, listened to and
embraced. What he had to say was that good, it was that
needed. Nowadays we must come up with descriptions TO define his voice
and presence, words like empowering, authentic, intelligent,
inspirational and necessary. He believed in the Spoken Word, that it
had power. He didn’t think we should call our music and poetry
“political or protest,” as those were labels from those in control. He
called them cultural realities and artistic statements: “We are
speaking our truth, bringing our energy. Music is its own energy, it’s
good and positive in strengthening our communities.”



“Living in Reality” by John Trudell.

The FBI agreed. In the documentary Trudell by Heather Rae (2005), they
quote an FBI memo early on: “He is extremely eloquent, therefore
extremely dangerous.”They compiled a 17,000-page dossier on him, one
of the longest in its history. Trudell said in the documentary,
Incident at Oglala, “All I did was talk, and they cracked down hard
just for that.” Trudell was referring to a pivotal And Cataclysmic
Moment in his life: the deaths of his wife Tina, their children
Ricarda Star, Sunshine Karma, Eli Changing Sun, unborn son Josiah
Hawk, and Tina’s mother Leah Hicks-Manning, in a suspicious fire in
their parents’ house in February 1979 at the Duck Valley Reservation,
Nevada. Trudell burned an American flag in protest on the steps of the
FBI building in Washington, D.C., within 24 hours of the house
fire. His family was known to have local enemies in law enforcement,
but they could not prove it was arson even after the private
investigator he hired said that the official version was practically
impossible.

The period that followed brought most people to identify with the
poet, artist and thinker called John Trudell. It is interesting to
note that some dubbed him an ex-activist but that is one of those
labels he criticized, and he would actually go on to influence another
generation of activists and ordinary people. Many artists now use the
phrase “Art Saved Me,” and it had to be something like that for
Trudell, because after the tragedy he was compelled to write
poetry. He said it just came to him, like Tina was talking to him and
he was just “following the lines.”

“I didn’t even know what reality was… then these lines came into my
head and something said don’t stop writing. I started to write my
lines, they’re called poems but in reality they are lines for me to
hold onto, my hanging-on lines, it was real to me, it was a parting
gift from Tina. Whatever happens just follow the writing and I might
be able to find some kind of center. Whatever my future is… to see how
long I get to participate… she gave me the lines to follow… so I won’t
fall completely… that feeling of falling apart, it doesn’t go away.” –
John Trudell, from the 2005 Heather Rae documentary, “Trudell.”

He issued the chapbook, Living in Reality in 1982. That same year he
began recording his poetry to traditional Native music by talking his
friend Quiltman into backing him on drum and vocals. In 1983, he
released his debut album Tribal Voiceon his own Peace Company
label. His relationship with Jackson Browne led him to other
supporters like Kris Kristofferson, Bonnie Raitt, Indigo Girls, John
Fogerty, Willie Nelson, and Bob Dylan. Legendary Kiowa guitarist Jesse
Ed Davis came up to him in 1986 and said, “I can turn your poems into
songs.” They recorded three albums during this time. AKA Graffiti Man
was released in 1986, dubbed the best album of the year by Bob Dylan,
followed by But This Isn’t El Salvador and Heart Jump Bouquet, both in
1987.

In 1988, Jesse Ed Davis passed away due to heroin addiction. Trudell
was stunned. However, he was able to connect with other performers who
kept him out there on stage, like Midnight Oil’s From Diesel and Dust
tour and Peter Gabriel’s WOMAD tour. That era is known for the
breakthrough of contemporary Native music, yet its main performers,
Buddy Red Bow, Jim Pepper and Jesse Ed Davis all died at the height of
their popularity due to ailments such as alcoholism and drug
addiction. Trudell, however, followed more along the path of Floyd Red
Crow Westerman, who walked on in 2007 after a slow deterioration of
health.

Trudell’s spoken word and music catalog is formidable. The title track
of Fables and Other Realities (1991) jumps at the listener from the
speaker and screen thanks to Trudell’s urgent, rhythmed delivery, a
style he would use in future songs and videos. It actually prefigures
NDN rap and hip-hop beats. The album kicked off a good collaboration
period with Mark Shark and other musicians. A.K.A. Graffiti Man from
1992 was remixed as a best of compilation in 1992 to critical acclaim,
as was Johnny Damas & Me in 1994, which continued the positive
reception. Trudell embarked on another pivotal period when he started
up his Bad Dog touring band in 1999. He always said he wanted to bring
Bad Dog everywhere with him from then on, but most times people were
happy just to hear him speak. He and the band produced Blue Indians
that year winning NAMMY awards; 1999 also brought international
attention with Stickman: Poems, Lyrics, Talks edited by Paola
Igliori. Further success in 2001 came with Bone Days, which was
produced by actress Angelina Jolie. Trudell and Bad Dog would release
Madness And The Moremes, a double album in 2007, and Crazier Than Hell
in 2010.



“Stickman” by John Trudell.

JT – DNA (Descendant Now Ancestor), 2001, is all spoken word, no
music, and represents his more popular speeches and themes. He repeats
some of those themes, and adds newer Bad Dog lyrics, in his most
recent, Through the Dust, 2014, which features the ambient beats of
Swiss producer, Kwest. There’s also the rare CD/vinyl, John Trudell &
Bad Dog – Live à Fip, a live album recorded in Paris, France in 2005
that now sells from $70 to $160. In 1992, he also released Children of
the Earth: Child’s Voice. Trudell was partnered with Marcheline
Bertrand, Angelina Jolie’s mother, as she dealt with cancer, which she
succumbed to in 2007. Marcheline and Angelina also executive produced
the 2005 documentary with Heather Rae as well.



“Children of the Earth: Child’s Voice” was released in 1992.

Trudell’s movie career also created a new generation of fans with
feature films like Thunderheart, a 1992 Hollywood thriller by director
Michael Apted, who also swung a documentary film into the deal,
Incident at Oglala, produced/narrated by Robert Redford. He was also
in the 1998 seminal Native-made film, Smoke Signals, written by
Sherman Alexie and directed by Chris Eyre. His great line in the film
is, “It’s a good day to be indigenous,” in which he is again back to
NDN radio roots as DJ Randy Peone of K-REZ. He was also in the Steven
Seagal thriller, On Deadly Ground, and played Coyote in Hallmark’s
made for TV movie, Dreamkeeper. Incident at Oglala and Trudell were
important projects that helped to develop Redford’s Sundance
Institute’s Native American Program, as overseen by Bird Runningwater.

Controversy occurred in 2004 when Trudell testified at the trial of
AIM members, Arlo Looking Cloud and John Graham, who were sentenced to
life imprisonment for the kidnapping and murder of Anna Mae
Pictou-Aquash. Trudell was boycotted by Native students in Vancouver,
British Columbia, and criticized by AIM hardliners. Trudell said it
was a confidential matter involving Looking Cloud relieving his
conscience and Trudell only talked about it after it was revealed in
media accounts.



TriStar Pictures

John Trudell starred alongside Val Kilmer in Thunderheart in 1992.

In constant demand as a speaker, presenter or commentator, he and his
fans preferred to post speeches and videos on his website, Facebook or
YouTube. His lengthy illness became generally known, and one may
assume he was involved in medical marijuana therapy given videos for
songs like Wildseed, Grassfire and various Bad Dog concerts and
interviews. He has several children, as he has said, “spread around
the country so they will always be safe.” His daughters Sage, Song and
Star are featured in the 2005 documentary and his daughter Tara and
her sisters were at Alcatraz. His youngest boy, Cetan, lives in San
Francisco. He was very private about his family life and had managers
screening all of his business and social media.

His last big media success was the book, Lines from a Mined Mind: The
Words of John Trudell, a collection of 25 years of poetry, lyrics and
essays from Fulcrum Publishing, 2008. This collection is a tribute to
the man, his legend and legacy. We all felt we knew him. He shared
pain, courage, insight and wisdom with all of us. He felt he could mix
thoughts, poetry, music and human energy to create… Power. Human Being
Power. Some felt him a prophet like Bob Marley, but John also said he
was a happy soldier in Elvis Presley’s Army.



“Lines from a Mined Mind” was published in 2008.

Safe journey, brother.

“We are strong again, thank you. Thank you John.”

RELATED: Native American Heritage Month: ‘Trudell,’ a Poem by Alex
Jacobs

RELATED: American Indian Poet John Trudell Walks On

Alex Jacobs, Mohawk, is a visual artist and poet living in Santa Fe.

This story was originally published on December 9, 2015.


~
