John Trudell: More than an activist with a huge FBI file
========================================================

Compiled by Dianne Meili
30 October 2017
Windspeaker.com Archives

https://windspeaker.com/news/footprints/john-trudell-more-than-an-activist-with-a-huge-fbi-file

PHOTO John Trudell, activist, poet, musician, actor

Lakota activist and poet John Trudell said that when he buried his
wife and three children, he became the earth that received them.

His family, along with his mother-in-law, died in a house fire he
maintained to his death was set by the FBI in 1979 to silence him and
AIM, the American Indian Movement.

Known for his peaceful opposition to unjust government policy towards
Indigenous people—and as someone who had a key role in every
significant event of his time having to do with equal rights for
Native Americans—John also advocated for the earth because “the
natural world has a right to existence and we are only a small part of
it.”

Questioning society’s material addiction and misled priorities, he
dedicated his life to Indigenous human rights and land issues.

His intelligent wit and outspoken lobbying also made him one of the
FBI’s most wanted.

“After he lost his family, we never saw him, and he went into
himself. That’s when his anger and sorrow began to come out in the
poetry most people know him for,” said his half-sister Edna
Baumann-Trudell. John, by this time, had retreated to Vancouver,
trying unsuccessfully to obtain asylum and refugee status in Canada.

Lengthy gaps had always punctuated reunions between John and his birth
family.

“He thought he was being followed by the FBI and he didn’t want to put
any of us in danger,” Baumann-Trudell said. But she remembers her kid
brother as a quick-talker who could get anybody to do anything.

“He got my sister to do his chores by telling her he didn’t know how
to sweep and he wanted her to demonstrate. By the time she finished,
the job was done and he skipped off. He was always doing stuff like
that. Smart as a fox. And with a wicked sense of humour.”

Born on Feb. 15, 1946 in Omaha, Nebraska, John was raised by a
truck-driving Santee Sioux father, Clifford Trudell, and a Mexican
Indian mother who died in childbirth when he was only six.

“He was your typical boy who hated school,” said Baumann-Trudell. He
enlisted in the U.S. Navy at 17 in 1963 to get away from book
learning; upon returning to civilian life he went to California, got
married, and trained for a career in radio and broadcasting.”

His life took a turn when students and organizers occupied Alcatraz
Island in 1969. For eight months, the group – calling themselves
“Indians of All Tribes” – held the rock “legally”, based on the Treaty
of Fort Laramie of 1868, which stated any abandoned federal property
would revert to the Indian Nations.

Using his radio experience, John fuelled the Native American rights
movement on “Radio Free Alcatraz”. A compelling speaker, he became the
voice of the occupation, and gained national attention. The occupation
fell apart in 1971—as did his marriage — without having gained ground
on its demands to government. But, it produced AIM.

First, the activists gained a profile protesting the dropped-charges
against two brothers who beat 51-year-old Raymond Yellow Thunder to
death in a bar in 1972. They scattered after a take-over of the Bureau
of Indian Affairs building shortly after.

Re-uniting in 1973 for the occupation of Wounded Knee village along
with the Oglala Sioux Civil Rights organization, AIM — based in
Minneapolis, Minnesota — hit the headlines, with John acting as its
chairman and national spokesperson. He relinquished the position in
1979.

This was the time he lost his family to a fire in his wife’s parents’
home on the Duck Valley Reservation in Nevada. Tina Manning perished,
along with his children Ricarda Star, Sunshine Karma, Eli Changing
Sun, unborn son Josiah Hawk, and Tina’s mother Leah Hicks Manning.

The family was known to have enemies within local law enforcement, but
John believed the fire was “set up” by the FBI as a strategy to
silence his protest of the Bureau’s abuses toward AIM and Native
Americans.

Indeed, the FBI tagged him as “extremely eloquent, therefore extremely
dangerous” in an early memo within the 17,000-page dossier they kept
on him, one of the longest in history. Though he hired a private
investigator to determine the cause of the fire, no cause was ever
found.

The numbness he felt after the tragedy receded as he began to write, a
talent that made him famous. 

“I didn’t even know what reality was … then these lines came into my
head,” John said in the 2005 documentary “Trudell”, by Heather Rae.

He explained that what others came to know as poetry was actually
“hanging-on” lines given to him by the spirit of his dead wife
Tina. “She gave me the lines to follow … so I won’t fall completely …
that feeling of falling apart, it doesn’t go away,” he added.

After publishing “Living in Reality”, a small, pocket-sized book
called a chapbook in 1982, he began putting his poetry to traditional
Aboriginal music, sparking a spoken word movement some say is a
continuation of Indigenous oral tradition.

He gained the attention of musician Jackson Browne, and the likes of
Kris Kristofferson, Bob Dylan, and Willie Nelson. Peter Gabriel and
the band Midnight Oil also invited him onstage with them.

John and his band Bad Dogs released their "Blue Indians" recording in
1999, which won a Native American Music Award, while his book
“Stickman: Poems, Lyrics, Talks” gained him international success that
same year.

United States popular music critic Neal Ullestad said of Trudell’s
live performances, “This isn’t simply pop rock with Indian drums and
chants added. It’s integrated rock and roll by an American Indian with
a multi-cultural band directed to anyone who will listen.”

John’s acting career gained him another set of fans, especially when
he played the enigmatic, radical activist and shapeshifter Jimmy Looks
Twice in 1992’s “Thunderheart” with Val Kilmer and Graham Greene.

John Trudell died from cancer on Dec. 8, 2015.

“My ride’s here. Love life. Love each other,” he said at the end.


~
