Wilson Aronilth (2015) Keynote
==============================

_Dr. Wilson Aronilth, Jr., a well-known philosopher, educator, and
spiritual leader who comes from the Navajo tribe, addresses the
Spotlight of Indigenous Peoples plenary at the 2015 Parliament of the
World's Religions in Salt Lake City, Utah on October 19th. He is the
author of "Foundation of Navajo Culture" published in 1992 by Navajo
Community College._

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rhJYX8umA5E

29 January 2016

[Dr. Aronilth begins by stepping beside the podium, in full view of
teh audience. He gestures fluidly but with certainty with his hands,
waving toward the audience, down to the ground, back up and touching
his brow and upper lip and crossing his hands over his heart with a
final flourish toward the audience...]

I want to extend my holy heartedly spiritual greetings to all of you
wonderful beautiful intelligent people, relatives and friends. And
also, my name was mentioned: Wilson Aronilth Jr. I was born and raised
at a place called Tuolomne, New Mexico.

I am representing Native American Church of North America "ah zay pay
a' na 'ha hav 'da" nation, and then also an American Church of Salt
Lake "'a shee pee t' ho" to stand here before you to tell you that I
want to represent all my Indian people that follows and believes in
peyote way of ceremonial belief. And um, this real beautiful ceremony
they tell us that... a woman found it.

Because, our Indian people lost connection with their spiritual,
holistic vision-mission philosophy, their way of life. They started
falling too much main law. So it was the spirit of a woman that found
this peyote holy medicine. So, in our peyote ceremony, a woman is
important!

A woman is important!

If it wasn't for a woman, you won't be here. There will be no
spiritual leaders. No leaders. No educators. No warriors. No hunters.

A woman is _special_.

_Listen_ to a woman!

That's our philosophy.

Then next one, they tell us as a member Native American Church peyote
ceremony way of life, we're told to have love, faith, hope, kindness,
respect, honesty, self-awareness, to keep our spirit, soul, bloodflow,
mind, and body clean, and to keep our generations bloodflow vision,
mission, philosophy clean. Because they say this way of belief is
going to give us that understanding to seek for our salvation. We're
going to go to a good place.

We're not going to hell!

We're going to a good salvation.

That's our belief, number one.

So today I want to address all you beautiful, renowned, religious
leaders, Christian leaders, federal government, lawmakers, and leaders
of this world, this areas. With peace, and then uh, justice,
sustainability, harmony, trust in the heart and mind, to tell you the
truth.

Today we're living in a world, where it's unbalanced. There's a lot of
greediness, igorancy, prejudice-ness, jealousy. Somebody wants to take
control of your life. Say, my way is the only way. That type of
attitude, we're following too much man-made law, whatever you might
call it.

Today, we're in different stages of our world where the vision and
mission, and educational system, governmental system, of our "ahn
'kun" generation is beg-dame and unclear.

We need—WAKE UP—we need ya tah WAKE UP! (cheering)

Let's all come back together. In our creator's name.

Today I want to tell my world-renowned leaders, wake up! 

You're destroying our mother earth!

You're destroying our elements!

You're destroying our generation!

You're destroying our beautiful creation!

As an indigenous indian people, you have classified and identified our
ceremonial belief as taboo, superstition, evil! You even identify us
as barbarians, and, and immigrants-like, and then also, minority! Only
a dead indian is a good indian! That's how you classify us!

That's _wrong_!

Who _are_ you to _tell_ us that?!

Where are you _coming_ from?!

_Where_ are you _coming_ from.

_Why_ are you _here_?!

What's your _purpose_?!

_Where_ are ya _going_?!

You gotta be positive.

You came here in fourteen hundred and ninety two, as foreigners,
immigrants, Europeans. That's when you came over seeking for richness,
wealth, the top of all for seeking for freedom of religion, democracy,
peace and justice for all.

Look what you did to our people!

You turn it around and abuse us.

You _need_ to wake up!

Don't identify our religious ceremonial belief "nay-ma-kuh-che peyote
way of see-uh" ceremonial belief as taboo, superstition, evil! Only a
dead Indians are good indian! That ceremonies gonna take you
to... hell! Don't say that. Respect us.

LOOK AT ME!

I'M NOT INVISIBLE!

I'M VISIBLE!

LOOK AT ME.

I HAVE FEELINS.

MY INDIAN PEOPLE HAS FEELIN!

We're only humble, spiritual, renowned people of this continent. So
understand that. And then respect our peyote religious ceremony way
of life. 

Don't sell it! Don't abuse our medicine and sell it—put it in
marketplaces—don't sell our eagle feathers, and sacred items we use,
and put it over there, and make profit, and money and get rich from
it! Look at your principal. Look at your your bible, your religious
principles, and ethic, and stop that! 

And... give it back to us.

Give us back our sacred ground!

Where we go to pray. Like we have our peyote that grows in
Texas. There's a lot of people destroying the land. You need to wake
up and say, hey wait! 

You know, please protect our sacred land where this peyote grows. So
we could go there in peace and harmony.

See we don't want to buy it like a department or pharmacy. We want to
go there freely to take it and have that spiritual harvest to the full
content of our mind and heart, and to pray with it, and to _use_
it. Plus all our other ceremonial way of belief.

We need help! We need your guidance! We need professional people to
protect what we believe in. There's a lot more I want to say, but we
need your respect. Your honor. To help us, and to... whether it's
financially, spiritually, holistically... however way you can help us.


Again I could say more, but that's the top of the line, to tell you
that you share my feelings with you at this time and moment.

I want to thank all the people that organized this. Say thank you for
all the people. And I want to thank the Native American Church of Salt
Lake "a shee pee toh".

My grandsons, my relatives, went through hardship. We didn't come here
to stand before you—it wasn't _easy_! We had to go through all kind of
struggle, but we made it!

Thank you!

A 'ho

~
