The Vanishing Indians of “These Truths”
=======================================

By Christine DeLucia

Los Angeles Review of Books

10 January 2019

https://lareviewofbooks.org/article/the-vanishing-indians-of-these-truths/
      
JILL LEPORE'S _These Truths: A History of the United States_, her
sweeping new synthesis of American history, identifies truth-telling
as a key for understanding American experiences. But in more than 900
pages, she recognizes individual Native Americans by name a total of
seven times.

Readers of this ambitious tome encounter -- briefly -- the
multilingual Guaticabanu, who interacted with Spaniards shortly after
Columbus's arrival; Powhatan, the paramount chief who negotiated with
Jamestown colonists; Metacom (also known as King Philip), the
Wampanoag leader who resisted New England colonial incursions;
Pontiac, the Ottawa leader of an 18th-century multi-tribal uprising;
and Sequoyah, the Cherokee inventor of an innovative syllabary. The
lone indigenous woman mentioned by name is the Nahua interpreter La
Malinche, who bore a son with conquistador Hernan Cortes in what is
now Mexico. The final cameo is by Chiricahua Apache leader Geronimo at
the moment of his surrender to the US Army.

Aside from these appearances, indigenous people -- the original
inhabitants of the Americas who have lived, labored, and governed on
this continent for thousands of years -- are largely left faceless and
nameless, subsumed within generalizations about "Indians." Or they are
simply ghosts, spectrally off-stage in the American story. You will
not find a single named indigenous person from the 20th or 21st
centuries. _These Truths _replicates the same troubling "vanishing"
that Lepore critiques in 19th-century novelist James Fenimore Cooper's
_The Last of the Mohicans_.

Indigenous absences are not a minor fault with _These Truths_. They
lie at its core and they bear weighty consequences for the story that
emerges. In a book that confidently bills itself as "an account of the
origins, course, and consequences of the American experiment over more
than four centuries," the marginalization of indigenous people is a
fundamental problem. Lepore takes on the undeniably difficult task of
comprehending the American saga in a multifaceted spirit, attempting a
type of middle path by concentrating, as she puts it, on "a great deal
of anguish […] and more hypocrisy" alongside stories of "decency and
hope, of prosperity and ambition."

The book proposes to tell a wide-ranging story, and in many respects,
like its consideration of the protracted struggle for racial equality,
it poses a timely rejoinder to airport best sellers trafficking in
whitewashed tales of Founding Fathers and military generals. But the
narrative Lepore constructs relies on the eventual exit of indigenous
actors to make way for other dramas.

Lepore has attained popular recognition and profitability as a book
author and _New Yorker _writer, and she has aspirations for a version
of _These Truths _to be used as an American history textbook as well
as an "old-fashioned civics book." I teach American history to college
students and can attest, as I believe Lepore would agree, that
students' encounters with historical subjects and methods are
important for reasons that reach far beyond classrooms. Learning
American histories can be an opportunity for students to reckon with
the complexity of past peoples' lives, and an occasion to develop
skills for critical and ethical thinking about contentious topics. I
talk frequently with my colleagues about how to cultivate such
learning, and how to select textbooks that support these goals. But
classrooms can also be settings where troubling mythologies and
outright untruths -- about progress, belonging, rights, nationalism,
and so on -- become more firmly embedded in the minds of the next
generations.

Methodology may have been a problem from the start. Lepore has a
reliance on written literacy and record-keeping as powerful
determinants of history and memory. The "history of truth is lashed to
the history of writing like a mast to a sail," she asserts, adding,
"most words, once spoken, are forgotten, while writing lasts." She
makes this claim partly through a contention about the "literall
advantage" supposedly maintained by Euro-American colonizers over
peoples of indigenous and African descent, who oftentimes used
non-written forms of expression and communication. Here she invokes a
point initially aired 20 years ago in her Bancroft Prize-winning first
book, _The Name of War: King Philip's War and the Origins of American
Identity _(1998), a study of Native American and colonial relations in
17th-century New England.

(Disclosure: I first debated this point with Lepore in 2006 when I was
an undergraduate in the History and Literature program that she was
chairing at Harvard, writing a senior thesis about the long legacies
of the indigenous resistance movement known as King Philip's War. We
disagreed then about the nature of written records in history making,
and their relationships to other forms of knowledge formation and
remembrance.)

In the years that followed, scholars of early America and Native
America have produced marvelously fine-grained reassessments of
literacies, communication, and meaning production. You can now browse
entire library shelves that illuminate the dynamic, enduring processes
through which distinctive Native communities have transmitted
information: knotted _quipu _strings, woven baskets, petroglyphs,
standing stones, oral traditions, songs, dances, gestures, cornfields,
clothing, sand and bone maps, and so much more. Haudenosaunee leaders,
to choose just one example from the Northeast, have used shell beads
woven into wampum belts to recall, transmit, and enact intertribal
diplomacy across large stretches of time and space. Colonizers
approached these materials and knowledge in complex ways: George
Washington and Thomas Jefferson participated in wampum exchanges with
indigenous delegations, recognizing the sovereignty of tribal nations
even as they formulated policies designed to contain indigenous power.

Had Lepore substantively engaged non-textual knowledge systems and
cross-cultural translation, she might have impressed upon readers a
genuinely transformative approach to the wide-ranging means by which
diverse historical experiences can be accessed. Or had she cultivated
sustained relationships with tribal communities who still maintain
these practices, she might have presented the issue
differently. Instead, commenting on indigenous and African origin
stories, she asserts with Eurocentric assurance: "[T]hese stories
would be unknown, or hardly known, if they hadn't been written down or
recorded."

_These Truths _underestimates readers' capacities to deal with
historical complexity and the nuanced ways that indigenous experiences
trouble convenient story lines about America's most iconic moments. It
walks readers through an extended tour of the Magna Carta, Mayflower
Compact, and English monarchy and Parliament, but has little to say
about the nature and evolution of indigenous political formations,
conceptions of rights and responsibilities, or practices of
decision-making.

Regarding the American Revolution, Lepore characterizes "nearly all
Native American peoples" as allies of the British. This monolithic
description elides just how contentious decisions around neutrality
and allegiances were for diverse indigenous communities, who in fact
pursued a large range of wartime alignments. It leaves little room for
understanding groups such as the Oneidas, who chose to ally with the
Americans and served in military units, or who experienced the
American victory as an ominous new phase of accelerated expansionism
into interior tribal homelands.

California earns a place for its role in the gold rush and proposed
"free state" status preventing westward expansion of slavery, with no
reckoning of how the sudden colonizer influx proceeded in tandem with
the violent subjugating, even genocidal targeting, of California
native peoples, as UCLA historian Benjamin Madley has recently
demonstrated. About the US Civil War, the book devotes no space to
Cherokees who allied with the Confederacy, or to Dakota, Cheyenne,
Arapaho, Navajo, and other tribal communities who endured devastating
executions, deportations, ethnic cleansings, and massacres under the
Lincoln administration. We hear nothing about Mankato, Sand Creek,
Canyon de Chelly, or other intensely important places that cast a
different light on this pivotal era.

Even when the source material directly deals with interaction between
native peoples and Euro-Americans, the text manages to gloss over
these presences. An illustration of a 19th-century Missouri River
trading post produced from an image by the Swiss-born artist and
traveler Karl Bodmer -- which shows native people standing in the
foreground of John Dougherty's Indian Agency -- is retitled by Lepore
simply as "Pioneers heading west." This is a revealing demonstration
of how erasure happens: one image, one sentence at a time.

_These Truths_ provides readers with few satisfying analyses of the
underlying structures, ideologies, and processes that animated
American movement into native homelands and attendant
dispossessions. It discusses "settlers" and "pioneers," but generally
declines to use the more trenchant word "colonizers." While Lepore has
made a point of disavowing what she deems scholarly jargon, she could
have profitably used concepts like settler colonialism: an ongoing
process of attempted indigenous displacement and erasure rather than a
discrete event in bygone times.

Readers do hear about "colonies" but are given the impression that
"colonial" refers to the period preceding the American Revolution,
rather than being shown how colonialism continues right into the 21st
century. Its limited discussion of debates regarding "founding an
empire" (regarding annexation of parts of Mexico) in the mid-19th
century reveals Lepore's disinclination to acknowledge much deeper
through-lines of American imperialism. Especially striking is complete
absence of attention to the forcible, illegal overthrow of the Kingdom
of Hawaii and annexation of Hawaii to the United States -- events that
occasioned vehement protest by native Hawaiians, underscoring deep
indigenous opposition to becoming part of the American project.

Lepore is certainly no defender of neatly triumphalist American
histories. She takes some pains to underscore tactics and subversions
by which Euro-Americans took over native homelands, devoting several
pages to acrimonious debates over Jacksonian Indian Removal, for
instance, and describing Native people subjected to "human zoos" at
the World's Columbian Exposition of 1893. However critically minded
this approach may have been intended, it has the effect of
foregrounding a narrative of indigenous victimhood. Nineteenth-century
native history is characterized primarily by "suffering, massacre, and
war" as well as military surrender and reservation confinement, summed
up in a generalized notion that at the century's end, "still the
conquest continued."

She's missing another story -- the creative and often ingenious
response by indigenous people in the face of dehumanizing
circumstances. In the case of the Columbian Exposition, it is true
that "White City" organizers intended fairgoers to scrutinize Native
Americans as ethnological specimens and contrast them with
technological progress and modernity showcased elsewhere. But as
Rosalyn LaPier and David Beck note in _City Indian: Native American
Activism in Chicago, 1893-1934_, some indigenous participants
leveraged the fair to their own advantage, entrepreneurially pushing
for better wages as performers or gaining enhanced social status
through their visibility. Potawatomi leader Simon Pokagon issued a
scathing "Red Man's Rebuke" in response to the dominant racist Indian
imagery on display. This helped him develop a rapport with Chicago's
mayor that led to efforts to improve indigenous representations and
rights. Lepore might argue that any synthetic work necessarily has to
be selective about the details it includes. But when a text repeatedly
curtails histories in ways that play up indigenous repression, it
fosters a partial view, at best.

Perhaps the most disappointing aspect is the book's relegation of
native topics almost entirely to the early period of American
history. The equation of indigeneity with "early" is a pernicious
trope in antiquarian history writing, as Jean O'Brien has demonstrated
in _Firsting and Lasting: Writing Indians Out of Existence in New
England_. One wonders how _These Truths _might have been transformed
by thoroughly engaging the influential critiques of historian Philip
Deloria, son of the celebrated Dakota intellectual Vine Deloria
Jr. (and now a colleague of Lepore's at Harvard). His _Indians in
Unexpected Places _demonstrated how Euro-Americans came to imagine
native people and nations as incompatible with American modernity, and
unfurled the forceful, innovative ways that natives themselves have
refuted this stereotype.

The lone moment when the book does engage 20th-century indigenous
topics is in discussing the occupation of Alcatraz Island, a strategic
takeover in 1969-1971 organized by Indians of All Tribes and other
groups (rather than by the American Indian Movement as Lepore
attributes it). It distills activists' goals as pushing for creation
of a Native American Studies center and describes the "Black Power
movement, the Chicano movement, and a growing Asian American movement"
as making "similar demands." The push for educational reform was
important. But subsuming Red Power under this umbrella misses a major
point. Indigenous activists also pressed the US federal government to
recognize tribal nations' sovereign difference and called for
fulfillment of treaty obligations, a context very different from the
Civil Rights movement's focus on inclusion and equal standing within
the United States.

The 20th and 21st centuries get the most ink in _These Truths_, and
these eras involved dramatic reconfigurations of tribal nations'
relationships with the United States. But there is no mention of the
Indian Reorganization Act of 1934, part of the "Indian New Deal" that
reversed previous assimilationist policies and refashioned tribal
governments; the 1940s formation of the National Congress of American
Indians, a coalition representing American Indian and Alaska Native
rights; the detrimental "termination era" of the 1950s and 1960s
during which the federal government attempted to extinguish tribal
sovereignties and nation-to-nation obligations; or the pushback by
Natives like Ada Deer, the Menominee scholar and activist who
eventually succeeded in reversing termination during the Nixon
administration. We don't learn about native people moving to cities
like Minneapolis, Chicago, San Francisco, Oakland, and Los Angeles,
resulting in vibrant "urban Indian" communities -- the subjects of
Cheyenne and Arapaho novelist Tommy Orange's recent best seller _There
There_. When Lepore ruminates on voices dissenting from US involvement
in Vietnam, the Gulf War, and the "war on terror," she does not
reflect on why Native Americans serve in the US military at one of the
highest per capita rates.

Had_ These Truths_ grappled with tribal-led fish-ins in the 1970s or
US Supreme Court decisions involving vital matters of American Indian
law, it could have addressed the enduring force of treaty rights and
tribal jurisdiction. If it had explored the American Indian Religious
Freedom Act of 1978 that overturned long histories of spiritual
repression, it could have recognized more complicated trajectories of
religious struggle. Discussing indigenous challenges to passport
policies and border walls could have reframed debates about
immigration. _These Truths _might have engaged with third-party
politics through figures like Winona LaDuke, the White Earth Ojibwe
activist and scholar who twice served as running mate to Ralph
Nader. Their Green Party platform envisioned American futures distinct
from the ones supported by either the Democrats or Republicans that
occupy so much of Lepore's attention.

The "Baby Veronica" adoption case, tribal casino gaming, land claims,
repatriation of objects and ancestral human remains from museums, the
Cherokee Freedmen, and Senator Elizabeth Warren's claims to Cherokee
identity: all of these recent headline-grabbing controversies arise
from indigenous political contexts.

A casual reader, upon reaching page 789 of the main text, might decide
to pass over the voluminous endnotes (which Lepore reports she has
kept "clipped and short, like a baby's fingernails"). But notes are
where scholars reveal their hands of cards. They tell us whose
thinking has influenced the writing and who the author considers
important critical interlocutors. As far as I can discern, the notes
to _These Truths _cite no indigenous scholars. The omission is
striking given the abundance of award-winning historical scholarship
by Jean O'Brien, David Chang, Robert Warrior, Paul Chaat Smith, Brenda
Child, Noenoe Silva, Amy Lonetree, Lisa Brooks, Kiara Vigil, Beth
Piatote, N. Bruce Duthu, K. Tsianina Lomawaima, Michael Witgen, Ned
Blackhawk, J. Kēhaulani Kauanui, Malinda Maynor Lowery, Roxanne
Dunbar-Ortiz, Debbie Reese, Joshua Reid, Kent Blansett, Nick Estes,
and Alyssa Mt. Pleasant -- to name just a handful of indigenous
intellectuals -- whose publications have proffered innovative new
methodologies that challenge the supposed silences of written
archives, and located indigenous experiences as central, not marginal,
to North American histories.

Non-indigenous historians have also done enormous work to demonstrate
the significant ways that indigenous histories have contoured every
aspect of American development, including politics. Yet even the most
prominent, highly accoladed research and writing -- the kind that is
really hard to overlook -- is missing. Pekka Hamalainen (Bancroft
Prize winner for _The Comanche Empire_), Ari Kelman (winner of a
Bancroft for _A Misplaced Massacre: Struggling Over the Memory of Sand
Creek_), Louis Warren (Bancroft winner for _God's Red Son: The Ghost
Dance Religion and the Making of Modern America_), Elizabeth Fenn (a
Pulitzer awardee for _Encounters at the Heart of the World: A History
of the Mandan People_), Colin Calloway (a National Book Award finalist
for _The Indian World of George Washington_), and Kathleen DuVal (a
finalist for the George Washington Book Prize for _Independence Lost:
Lives on the Edge of the American Revolution_) are nowhere to be seen
in Lepore's notes. Nor do their ideas and interventions appear
reflected in the main text. In so many ways, the resulting book seems
to reflect pervasive disengagement from conversations that Lepore's
professional peers have done so much to move forward.

_These Truths _concludes with a metaphor about the US ship of state,
arguing that this "tattered" vessel could be restored to stability and
dignity if only liberals and conservatives could commit to concerted
civic action and rational discourse. This conciliatory vision makes
sense only from a certain insular vantage, one that conceives of the
US nation-state as a project well intentioned (though flawed) from its
founding moments, intrinsically worth fixing and carrying forward. One
wonders how the book might have arrived at an alternative conclusion
if Lepore had chosen to pursue in her final pages not a protracted
dissection of Donald Trump's 2016 election but a different powerful
happening from that year: the gatherings at Standing Rock. Oceti
Sakowin community members and allies from many tribal and global
communities convened to protect the waters around Mni Sose (the
Missouri River) from being crossed by the Dakota Access Pipeline. The
movement shone a bright light on a deep history of American
colonialism that manifests far more continuity than difference across
US presidential administrations.

_These Truths _is a missed opportunity on many levels. It loses sight
of longer-term trajectories, structures, patterns, and mentalities
that have shaped America over multiple centuries. It evinces the
blinkered conclusions that can arise from a position of security,
status, and privilege. It may well find its way into classrooms. If it
does, I hope that educators will critically contextualize its
claims. They might juxtapose it with _Why You Can't Teach United
States History without American Indians_, which notes that the "ways
in which Indian history has intersected with yet often run counter to
histories of other Americans" demonstrate how "U.S. citizenship,
political equality, and individual rights are not natural virtues
coveted by all but have a long history of contestation." Or as Roxanne
Dunbar-Ortiz, author of _An Indigenous Peoples' History of the United
States_, has put it: "Writing US history from an Indigenous peoples'
perspective requires rethinking the consensual national narrative."

Reckoning with _These Truths _has led me to ruminate on what
alternative accountings and timelines of American history can look
like. A few weeks ago, I attended a land acknowledgment event outside
of Chicago's monumental Field Museum. The museum originated with the
1893 World's Fair and still contains many of the indigenous objects
from that exposition. Museum staff have recently launched a
comprehensive reconceptualization of the Native American exhibitions
to more accurately reflect specific tribal histories as well as
connections to present-day indigenous communities. My colleague Doug
Kiel, an Oneida historian at Northwestern University involved in the
project, remarked that the revamped exhibitions would assist visitors,
"maybe for the first time, to realize that there is another layer of
Chicago's history that they are completely unfamiliar with."

The acknowledgment included dedication of an interpretive placard
describing the long history of the place known as Shikakw'a, "the
traditional homelands of the Three Fires Confederacy: Ojibwe, Odawa,
and Potawatomi." As the assembled crowd stood in the cold, we could
see Chicago's skyline, including Trump Tower, which was too small to
give much notice from this distance.

¤

Christine DeLucia is a historian at Mount Holyoke College and will
soon be joining the faculty at Williams College. She is the author of
_Memory Lands: King Philip's War and the Place of Violence in the
Northeast_
