The Map Of Native American Tribes You've Never Seen Before
==========================================================

by Hansi Lo Wang

June 24, 20144:03 PM ET

NPR

https://www.npr.org/sections/codeswitch/2014/06/24/323665644/the-map-of-native-american-tribes-youve-never-seen-before

Aaron Carapella, a self-taught mapmaker in Warner, Okla., has designed
a [map of Native American tribes](2013-carapella-north-america.pdf)
showing their locations before first contact with Europeans. Hansi Lo
Wang/NPR

Finding an address on a map can be taken for granted in the age of GPS
and smartphones. But centuries of forced relocation, disease and
genocide have made it difficult to find where many Native American
tribes once lived.

Aaron Carapella, a self-taught mapmaker in Warner, Okla., has
pinpointed the locations and original names of hundreds of American
Indian nations before their first contact with Europeans.

![alt](https://media.npr.org/assets/img/2014/06/24/tribal_nation_map_custom-973eefab3541e8d2c23056100549ac543e59beee-s1100-c15.jpg)

As a teenager, Carapella says he could never get his hands on a
continental U.S. map like this, depicting more than 600 tribes -- many
now forgotten and lost to history. Now, the 34-year-old designs and
sells maps as large as 3 by 4 feet with the names of tribes hovering
over land they once occupied.

Carapella has designed maps of Canada and the continental U.S. showing
the original locations and names of Native American tribes. [View the
full map
(PDF).](http://www.npr.org/assets/news/2014/06/Tribal_Nations_Map_NA.pdf)
Courtesy of Aaron Carapella

"I think a lot of people get blown away by, 'Wow, there were a lot of
tribes, and they covered the whole country!' You know, this is Indian
land," says Carapella, who calls himself a "mixed-blood Cherokee" and
lives in a ranch house within the jurisdiction of the Cherokee Nation.

For more than a decade, he consulted history books and library
archives, called up tribal members and visited reservations as part of
research for [his map project](http://tribalnationsmaps.com/), which
began as pencil-marked poster boards on his bedroom wall. So far, he
has designed maps of the continental U.S., Canada and Mexico. A map of
Alaska is currently in the works.

What makes Carapella's maps distinctive is their display of both the
original and commonly known names of Native American tribes, according
to Doug Herman, senior geographer at the Smithsonian National Museum
of the American Indian in Washington, D.C.

![](https://media.npr.org/assets/img/2014/06/24/tribal_nation_mexico_custom-17b2bbf3c3e64ccda740862ceac7568d8925bf94-s1100-c15.png)

_This map of Mexico features both the original and commonly known
names of some indigenous nations. [View the full map
(PDF).](http://www.npr.org/assets/news/2014/06/Tribal_Map_Mexico.pdf)
Courtesy of Aaron Carapella_

"You can look at [Carapella's] map, and you can sort of get it
immediately," Herman says. "This is Indian Country, and it's not the
Indian Country that I thought it was because all these names are
different."

He adds that some Native American groups got stuck with names chosen
arbitrarily by European settlers. They were often derogatory names
other tribes used to describe their rivals. For example, "Comanche" is
derived from a word in Ute meaning "anyone who wants to fight me all
the time," [according to the Encyclopaedia
Britannica](http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/127235/Comanche).

"It's like having a map of North America where the United States is
labeled 'gringos' and Mexico is labeled 'wetbacks,' " Herman
says. "Naming is an exercise in power. Whether you're naming places or
naming peoples, you are therefore asserting a power of sort of
establishing what is reality and what is not."

Look at a map of Native American territory today, and you'll see tiny
islands of reservation and trust land engulfed by acres upon acres
ceded by treaty or taken by force. Carapella's maps serve as a
reminder that the population of the American countryside stretches
back long before 1776 and 1492.

_Take a closer look at Aaron Carapella's __[map of the continental
U.S. and
Canada_](http://www.npr.org/assets/news/2014/06/Tribal_Nations_Map_NA.pdf)_
and his __[map of
Mexico_](http://www.npr.org/assets/news/2014/06/Tribal_Map_Mexico.pdf)_. He
sells prints on his __[website_](http://tribalnationsmaps.com/)_._

Carapella describes himself as a former "radical youngster" who used
to lead protests against Columbus Day observances and supported other
Native American causes. He says he now sees his mapmaking as another
way to change perceptions in the U.S.

"This isn't really a protest," he explains. "But it's a way to convey
the truth in a different way."

~
