Dr. Aronilth (2015) Parliament
==============================

_Navajo Dr. Wilson Aronilth Jr. Delivers Keynote at the 2015 Parliament_

Navajo Dr. Wilson Aronilth Jr. Delivers Keynote at the 2015 Parliament
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rhJYX8umA5E
29 January 2016

Captured 22 May 2020

_Dr. Wilson Aronilth, Jr., a well-known philosopher, educator, and
spiritual leader who comes from the Navajo tribe, addresses the
Spotlight of Indigenous Peoples plenary at the 2015 Parliament of the
World's Religions in Salt Lake City, Utah on October 19th._

_Computer generated transcript, needs editing._

I want to extend my holy heartedly
spiritual greetings to all of you
wonderful beautiful intelligent people
relatives and friends and also my name
was mentioned Watson
Ronald jr. I was born and raised a place
called totally New Mexico and I am
representing Native American Church of
North America as a open house out in the
nation and then also an American Church
of Salt Lake Ashi beat Hawk to stand
here before you to tell you that I want
to read represent all my Indian people
their followers and believes in purely
way of ceremonial believe and this real
beautiful ceremony they tell us that a
woman found it because our Indian people
lost connection with their spiritual
holistic vision mission philosophy their
way of life they star falling too much
main law so it was a spirit of a woman
that found this purity holy medicine so
in our purely ceremony a woman is
important
a woman is important if it wasn't for a
woman you won't be here there will be no
spiritual leaders no leaders no educator
no warriors no hunters a woman special
listened to a woman that's our
philosophy then next when they tell us
is as remember American Church purusam
on the way of life were told to have
love faith hope climb this respect
honesty self-awareness to keep our
spirit soul blood flow mind and body
clean and to keep our generations blood
flow vision mission philosophy clean
because they say this way I believe is
going to give us that understanding to
see people or salvation we're going to
go to a good

We're not going to hell!
------------------------

we're not going to hell we're going to
good salvation that's our believe number
one so today I want to address all you
beautiful renowned religious leaders
Christian leaders federal government
lawmakers and leaders of this world this
areas with peace and then justice
stainability harmony trust in the heart
and mind to tell you the truth today
we're living in a world where it's
unbalanced there's a lot of greediness
ignacy prejudice nnessee alice ii
somebody wants to take control of your
life
so my way is the only way that type of
attitude we're falling too much man-made
law whatever you might call it today
when the different stages of our world
where the vision admission and
educational system governmental system
of our uncle generation is vague game
and unclear when it 

WAKE UP!
--------

wake up we need to
wake up it's all come back together in
our creator's name today i want to tell
my world renowned leaders wake up you're
destroying our mother earth you're
destroying our elements you're
destroying our generation you're
destroying our beautiful creation as an
indent is offending people you have
classified and identified our sand only
believed as taboo superstition
evil you even identify this Russians by
barians in and immigrants like and then
also minority,

> Only a dead indian is a good indian.
> That's how you classify us!
> That's _wrong_!
> Who are _you_ to tell us that?!
> Where are you _coming_ from...
> _Where_ are you _coming_ from...
> _Why_ are you _here_...
> What's your _purpose_...
> _Where_ are you _going_?!

only a dead Indian as it
could end in that's how you classifies
that's wrong
who are you to tell us that where are
you coming from where are you coming
from why are you here what's your
purpose where you going

you got to be positive you came the air
1492 as foreigners immigrants Europeans
that's when you came over seeking for
richness well the top of all is seeking
for freedom religion democracy peace and
justice for all
look what you did to our people you
turned it around and abusive you need to
wake up don't identify a religious term
on your belief may my conscience the
only will see ceremony believe as taboo
superstition evil only a dead Indians
are good in and you that same always
will take you to how don't say that
respect us look at me
I'm not invisible
I'm visible
look at me
I have feelings my Indian people has
feeling were only humble spiritual
renowned people of this continent so
understand and then respect our puny
religious ceremony way of life don't
sell it don't abuse our medicine and
salad put it in marketplaces don't sell
our eagle feathers and sacred islands we
use and put it over there and make
profit and money and get rich from it
you better slow down look at yourself
look at your principal look at your your
Bible your religious principles and
Africans stop that and give it back to
us give us back our sacred ground where
we going to pray like we have our peyote
that grows in Texas there's a lot of
people destroying the land you need to
wake up and say hey way you know please
protect our sacred land where this peony
grows so we could go there in peace and
harmony we all don't want to fly like a
Department of pharmacy we want to go
there freely to take it and have that
spiritual harvest to the full content of
our mind and heart and to pray with it
and to use it plus all our other Sam
Warner where believe we need help we
need your guidance we need professional
people to protect what we believe in and
there's a lot more I want to say but we
need your respect your honor to help and
to
whether it's a financially spiritually
holistically however where you can help
us again I could say more but that's the
top of the line to tell you that you
share my feelings with you at this time
and moment I want to thank all the
people that organized this say thank you
for all the people and I want to thank
the made American Church of salt late a
sheep you talk my grandsons my brother
went to hardship wouldn't come here to
stand before it wasn't easy we had to go
to all kind of struggle but we made it
thank you
a hoe
you

~
