"Chief Joseph" _Hin-mah-too-yah-lat-kekt_ (1840-1904)
=====================================================

PBS "The West" eight-part documentary series
http://www.pbs.org/weta/thewest/people/a_c/chiefjoseph.htm

The man who became a national celebrity with the name "Chief Joseph"
was born in the Wallowa Valley in what is now northeastern Oregon
in 1840. He was given the name Hin-mah-too-yah-lat-kekt, or Thunder
Rolling Down the Mountain, but was widely known as Joseph, or Joseph
the Younger, because his father had taken the Christian name Joseph
when he was baptized at the Lapwai mission by Henry Spalding in 1838.

Joseph the Elder was one of the first Nez Percé converts to
Christianity and an active supporter of the tribe's longstanding peace
with whites. In 1855 he even helped Washington's territorial governor
set up a Nez Percé reservation that stretched from Oregon into
Idaho. But in 1863, following a gold rush into Nez Percé territory,
the federal government took back almost six million acres of this
land, restricting the Nez Percé to a reservation in Idaho that was
only one tenth its prior size. Feeling himself betrayed, Joseph the
Elder denounced the United States, destroyed his American flag and his
Bible, and refused to move his band from the Wallowa Valley or sign
the treaty that would make the new reservation boundaries official.

When his father died in 1871, Joseph was elected to succeed him. He
inherited not only a name but a situation made increasingly volatile
as white settlers continued to arrive in the Wallowa Valley. Joseph
staunchly resisted all efforts to force his band onto the small Idaho
reservation, and in 1873 a federal order to remove white settlers and
let his people remain in the Wallowa Valley made it appear that he
might be successful. But the federal government soon reversed itself,
and in 1877 General Oliver Otis Howard threatened a cavalry attack to
force Joseph's band and other hold-outs onto the
reservation. Believing military resistance futile, Joseph reluctantly
led his people toward Idaho.

Unfortunately, they never got there. About twenty young Nez Percé
warriors, enraged at the loss of their homeland, staged a raid on
nearby settlements and killed several whites. Immediately, the army
began to pursue Joseph's band and the others who had not moved onto
the reservation. Although he had opposed war, Joseph cast his lot with
the war leaders.

What followed was one of the most brilliant military retreats in
American history. Even the unsympathetic General William Tecumseh
Sherman could not help but be impressed with the 1,400 mile march,
stating that "the Indians throughout displayed a courage and skill
that elicited universal praise... [they] fought with almost scientific
skill, using advance and rear guards, skirmish lines, and field
fortifications." In over three months, the band of about 700, fewer
than 200 of whom were warriors, fought 2,000 U.S. soldiers and Indian
auxiliaries in four major battles and numerous skirmishes.

By the time he formally surrendered on October 5, 1877, Joseph was
widely referred to in the American press as "the Red Napoleon." It is
unlikely, however, that he played as critical a role in the Nez
Percé's military feat as his legend suggests. He was never considered
a war chief by his people, and even within the Wallowa band, it was
Joseph's younger brother, Olikut, who led the warriors, while Joseph
was responsible for guarding the camp. It appears, in fact, that
Joseph opposed the decision to flee into Montana and seek aid from the
Crows and that other chiefs -- Looking Glass and some who had been
killed before the surrender -- were the true strategists of the
campaign. Nevertheless, Joseph's widely reprinted surrender speech has
immortalized him as a military leader in American popular culture:

I am tired of fighting. Our chiefs are killed. Looking Glass is
dead. Toohoolhoolzote is dead. The old men are all dead. It is the
young men who say, "Yes" or "No." He who led the young men [Olikut] is
dead. It is cold, and we have no blankets. The little children are
freezing to death. My people, some of them, have run away to the
hills, and have no blankets, no food. No one knows where they are --
perhaps freezing to death. I want to have time to look for my
children, and see how many of them I can find. Maybe I shall find them
among the dead. Hear me, my chiefs! I am tired. My heart is sick and
sad. From where the sun now stands I will fight no more forever.

Joseph's fame did him little good. Although he had surrendered with
the understanding that he would be allowed to return home, Joseph and
his people were instead taken first to eastern Kansas and then to a
reservation in Indian Territory (present-day Oklahoma) where many of
them died of epidemic diseases. Although he was allowed to visit
Washington, D.C., in 1879 to plead his case to U.S. President
Rutherford B. Hayes, it was not until 1885 that Joseph and the other
refugees were returned to the Pacific Northwest. Even then, half,
including Joseph, were taken to a non-Nez Percé reservation in
northern Washington, separated from the rest of their people in Idaho
and their homeland in the Wallowa Valley.

In his last years, Joseph spoke eloquently against the injustice of
United States policy toward his people and held out the hope that
America's promise of freedom and equality might one day be fulfilled
for Native Americans as well. An indomitable voice of conscience for
the West, he died in 1904, still in exile from his homeland, according
to his doctor "of a broken heart."

~
