Crazy Horse _Tashunca-uitco_ (1849-1877)
========================================

PBS "The West" Eight-part documentary series
Captured 20 May 2020
http://www.pbs.org/weta/thewest/people/a_c/crazyhorse.htm

Celebrated for his ferocity in battle, Crazy Horse was recognized
among his own people as a visionary leader committed to preserving the
traditions and values of the Lakota way of life.

Even as a young man, Crazy Horse was a legendary warrior. He stole
horses from the Crow Indians before he was thirteen, and led his first
war party before turning twenty. Crazy Horse fought in the 1865-68 war
led by the Oglala chief Red Cloud against American settlers in
Wyoming, and played a key role in destroying William J. Fetterman's
brigade at Fort Phil Kearny in 1867.

Crazy Horse earned his reputation among the Lakota not only by his
skill and daring in battle but also by his fierce determination to
preserve his people's traditional way of life. He refused, for
example, to allow any photographs to be taken of him. And he fought to
prevent American encroachment on Lakota lands following the Fort
Laramie Treaty of 1868, helping to attack a surveying party sent into
the Black Hills by General George Armstrong Custer in 1873.

When the War Department ordered all Lakota bands onto their
reservations in 1876, Crazy Horse became a leader of the
resistance. Closely allied to the Cheyenne through his first marriage
to a Cheyenne woman, he gathered a force of 1,200 Oglala and Cheyenne
at his village and turned back General George Crook on June 17, 1876,
as Crook tried to advance up Rosebud Creek toward Sitting Bull's
encampment on the Little Bighorn. After this victory, Crazy Horse
joined forces with Sitting Bull and on June 25 led his band in the
counterattack that destroyed Custer's Seventh Cavalry, flanking the
Americans from the north and west as Hunkpapa warriors led by chief
Gall charged from the south and east.

Following the Lakota victory at the Little Bighorn, Sitting Bull and
Gall retreated to Canada, but Crazy Horse remained to battle General
Nelson Miles as he pursued the Lakota and their allies relentlessly
throughout the winter of 1876-77. This constant military harassment
and the decline of the buffalo population eventually forced Crazy
Horse to surrender on May 6, 1877; except for Gall and Sitting Bull,
he was the last important chief to yield.

Even in defeat, Crazy Horse remained an independent spirit, and in
September 1877, when he left the reservation without authorization, to
take his sick wife to her parents, General George Crook ordered him
arrested, fearing that he was plotting a return to battle. Crazy Horse
did not resist arrest at first, but when he realized that he was being
led to a guardhouse, he began to struggle, and while his arms were
held by one of the arresting officers, a soldier ran him through with
a bayonet.

~
