American Indian Model Schools
=============================

AIMS <https://www.aimsk12.org/>

Founded in 1996, AIMS K-12 began as a middle school (AIPCS) by Native
American families looking to retain a cultural connection for their
children. AIPCS was Oakland’s second publicly-funded charter
school. In 2006, AIPCS became the first Oakland public charter school
in Oakland to win recognition as a National Blue Ribbon School. Later
that year, AIPCS expanded to include a high school (AIPHS), and, in
2012, AIMS K-12 expanded to include an elementary school. As AIMS K-12
grew, the student body became increasingly diverse, and, in 2018, both
our elementary and middle schools were recognized for nearly closing
the achievement gap in African American students. To date, AIMS K-12
currently serves approximately 1300 students.

----

<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/American_Indian_Model_Schools>

![APICS Ethnicity](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/2/2a/AIPCS_ethnicities.png)

American Indian Model Schools (AIM Schools) is a charter school system
based in Oakland, California. Started with the American Indian Public
Charter School (AIPCS), a middle school in the late 1990s to serve
Native American students, in 2007 it expanded to include another
middle school and a high school. The main campus is in the Laurel area
and includes AIPCS, a middle school of grades 5–8, and American Indian
Public High School (AIPHS), a high school (9–12). AIPHS students can
also take select classes at Merritt College. American Indian Public
Charter School II (AIPCS II) has grades K–8 at a second campus located
in Oakland's Chinatown. By 2012 the student population of the AIM
schools had become 90% Asian American.

The Oakland Unified School District (OUSD) granted the charter to the
school system and oversees it. The American Indian Model School system
has its own school board and internal policies.

Under the leadership of Ben Chavis (Lumbee), a Native American
professor, AIPCS students made considerable progress in academic
scores from 2000 to 2007, and enrollment increased at the school. The
first middle school, AIPCS, received national recognition
in 2007. Some of Chavis's disciplinary methods and his treatment of
students and teachers generated controversy, and he resigned as
principal in 2007. But the board voted to maintain him in an
influential executive role at the school and with the model school
system. In 2012 Chavis ended his ties with the charter system
(although his children remained as students) and returned to his home
state of North Carolina.

For a period, the charter system's charter from the OUSD was at risk,
but the school gained a court injunction in 2012 to allow it to
continue to operate. With the change in management and in view of the
students' achievements in academic scores, the Model School system's
charter was renewed in 2013 for a 5-year term. This included an
expansion to serve grades K–4 at AIPCS II.

...

After its founding, the school had a high staff turnover rate and
insufficient funds for textbooks and computers. In 2000 the Oakland
Unified School District (OUSD) considered closing the school.  Nanette
Asimov of the San Francisco Chronicle reported that the school, which
had 37 students, was "sinking fast," could not keep its students, and
did not have "viable test scores."

Evelyn Lamenti, an employee with the OUSD Office of Indian Education,
recruited Ben Chavis (Lumbee), to serve as principal. Formerly a
professor at San Francisco State College, Chavis was then teaching at
the University of Arizona. Lamenti believed that he would succeed due
to his background in education, interest in charter schools, and
knowledge of children living in inner-city communities.

In 2000 Chavis became the head of the school. He fired most of the
school's employees and eliminated the Native American cultural
classes. Chavis said that he recruited new teachers who had "strong"
academic backgrounds and "didn't see the students as victims, even
though their lives often are incredibly difficult." By 2001, he had
replaced all but one teacher.

By 2002 the school's enrollment tripled, and its test scores were
increasing. For the school year 2006–2007, Chavis and his board
founded the American Indian Model School system, adding the American
Indian Charter High School with the beginning of the school year in
September 2006.

...

Under Chavis, the school system's administration opposed to
U.S. liberal philosophies, and it promoted free-market
capitalism. Chavis opposed teacher's unions. Landsberg reported that
the AIM system schools "sometimes seem like creations of television's
Colbert Report and that the AIM system schools "mock liberal orthodoxy
with such zeal that it can seem like a parody." American conservatives
praised Chavis and the AIM Schools. Columnist George Will said he
favored the charter school system because its "new paternalism" could
close achievement gaps between socioeconomic classes.


Spitting in the eye of mainstream education
-------------------------------------------

_Three no-frills charter schools in Oakland mock liberal orthodoxy,
teach strictly to the test -- and produce some of the state's top
scores._

By Mitchell Landsberg

May 31, 2009

Los Angeles Times

<http://web.archive.org/web/20090611155315/https://www.latimes.com/news/local/la-me-charter31-2009may31,0,6518091,full.story>

Not many schools in California recruit teachers with language like
this: “We are looking for hard working people who believe in free
market capitalism. . . . Multicultural specialists, ultra liberal
zealots and college-tainted oppression liberators need not apply.”

….The Academic Performance Index, the central measuring tool for
California schools, rates schools on a scale from zero to 1,000, based
on standardized test scores. The state target is an API of 800….The
oldest of the American Indian schools, the middle school known simply
as American Indian Public Charter School, has an API of 967. Its two
siblings — American Indian Public Charter School II (also a middle
school) and American Indian Public High School — are not far behind.

~
