New national park could save high plains in Kansas
By The Kansas City Star Editorial Board

In 1987, two Rutgers’ University researchers ignited a prairie fire by
suggesting much of the high plains, including a large swath of Kansas
farmland, should be returned to its natural state — what they called a
Buffalo Commons.

The idea, which envisioned parts of 10 prairie states being
transformed into a massive short-grass prairie national park, was
derided as impractical, impossible and un-American. It was called
city-logic.

Farmers questioned why the Easterners hadn’t suggested returning New
York City to its wild roots. “The idea offended me,” said former
Kansas Governor Mike Hayden, once a harsh Buffalo Commons critic.

But in the decades since, the population decline that spurred the plan
not only continued, but accelerated. The already-stressed Ogallala
Aquifer, the sole source of water for much of the region, has dried up
faster than anticipated. Irrigated farmland has become dry,
low-production farmland. Local economies of the high plains have
dwindled.

Today, Buffalo Commons — far from threatening an iconic American
lifestyle — may instead be a savior to the region.
“How do we bring a vital economy to life in northwest Kansas?” Hayden
asked recently from his office as Kansas Secretary of Wildlife and
Parks. “The model we’re now following has failed. Buffalo Commons
makes more sense every year.”

In Kansas, the primary focus would be in 16 northwestern
counties. Since 1980, 12 of the counties have lost more than a quarter
of their population, while the state population has increased by
almost a fifth.

Rutgers professor Frank J. Popper, one of the Buffalo Commons
architects, says it was never a plan, but a general idea of how to
turn some horrible news about population losses into a positive for
the region.

“The new data is quite frankly very scary,” Popper said. Beyond those
who’ve left, those who remain are far less likely to be under age 18
and more likely to be over 65 (often twice the Kansas average).

Reversing those trends would take a major effort. After decades of
failing to attract business in northwestern Kansas, it’s clear the
model has to go in a different direction. Nobody wants to believe it,
but agriculture is only 3 percent of the gross state product of
Kansas, and that proportion is falling.

Especially in northwest Kansas, a big, new idea is needed.

The biggest asset of the region is its heritage, the prairie. The
romance of an open space to the horizon — home to grazing bison,
antelope, elk and deer — is the American story in a nutshell. Land as
vast and open as an ocean.

So The Star is suggesting a new, million-acre park: Buffalo Commons
National Park.

And, while this will be costly and upset some landowners, we’re
suggesting that private, state and federal officials start planning
and purchasing the least-populated pieces of the state: Greeley and
Wallace counties.

Land acquisition would cost something less than $1 billion. There’s
even a potential funding source. Last week, Democratic U.S. senators
Jeff Bingaman of New Mexico and Max Baucus of Montana introduced a
bill to fully and permanently fund the Land and Water Conservation
Fund.

Since 1965, the fund has used offshore oil and gas royalties for land
protection. In recent years, much of that money has been re-directed,
but the new bill would ensure the intended $900 million a year is
available. Only $155 million was made available a year ago.

The two Kansas counties best-suited to become home to the new park are
flush against the Colorado border, just south of Interstate 70. The
terrain is typically stark. The aquifer is almost tapped out, though
without use it could recharge, and some experts believe the stream
beds that have run dry for decades would again boast water.

Today, the total population for the two counties is below 2,700. The
average population is at or below two people per square mile. One of
every five residents is past retirement age, and the average age for a
farmer is 56.

This isn’t a call to grab the land tomorrow, but to begin making
progress toward what could become one of the country’s 15 largest
national parks, a place to honor the American Prairie. Over time, a
park could grow up around the three small towns of the area, without
eliminating them. Bolstered by tourism, nearby small towns would grow
slightly in size. Schools already under intense pressure to further
consolidate would get enrollment boosts.

There are numerous arguments in favor of this plan:

Kansas is vastly under-represented in national parkland, and can
accurately be considered parkland poor today.

The prairie is the greatest long-term carbon sequestration landscape
available, as the grasses take carbon from the atmosphere and bury it
deep in the ground, where it stays to nurture plant growth.

A new national park would attract tourists. Europeans, in love with
the romance of the American West, would be drawn to it, as would other
international visitors and Americans. Parks of similar size and
remoteness in Texas and North Dakota attract at least 300,000 visitors
a year. With the central location of Kansas, it has the potential to
attract more.

Tourism could grow into a lifeline for surrounding counties, all of
which are struggling to find ways to keep native sons and daughters at
home, but have largely failed to build enough industry or create
enough jobs.

Grasslands are the world’s most endangered eco-system, and
re-establishing a large patch is important to America’s natural and
cultural heritage.

Buffalo Commons is an idea whose time has come.

As Walt Whitman explained more than 100 years ago: “While I know the
standard claim is that Yosemite, Niagara Falls, the Upper Yellowstone
and the like afford the greatest natural shows, I am not so sure but
the prairies and plains, while less stunning at first sight, last
longer, fill the esthetic sense fuller, precede all the rest, and make
North America’s characteristic landscape.”

----

**a new Prairie National (International?) Park**

Submitted by Thulefoth on November 17, 2009 - 11:09am.

Matthew Schofield,

A new Prairie National Park is an attractive idea.

The priority - the 'urgency' - for it is reduced, because with the
abandonment of farms and general reduction of economic/human activity,
the natural ecology is reasserting itself. We're not in danger of
further loses - in fact, we're gaining, environmentally, without any
cost or effort.

The places where people are no longer able to made a dollar off the
soil are the least in need of intervention and protection, since they
are being let-go back to nature, anyway. The parts of the native
prairie habitat that are in need of saving, are those where farming
remains profitable and all the habitat is under the plow & livestock.

The Prairie National Park is really two separate main ideas, and there
are visible compatibility-issues between them. One of the ideas is the
prairie, and the other is the buffalo.

We can save examples of the prairie habitat in fairly small pieces,
but wild buffalo are much less cooperative. We have rather
high-profile ongoing conflicts with buffalo in Yellowstone National
Park, right now. Elk at Yellowstone and quite a few other places
around the country are also causing conflicts.

People at all levels of the decision-making process are going to be
aware of the large-animal management issues that face us now. Critics
& opponents will use these problems against the project-idea.

Kansas is only one relatively small part of a large, sprawling &
diverse North American prairie habitat - much of it in chronic
economic distress. Taking the full context in view, experts and
leaders interested in the Prairie Park idea have a wealth of diverse
options to weight & compare, in selecting just where and in what
configuration they should push for a Park.

"Buffalo Commons" is something entirely different from a new National
Park on the North American prairie. If I was at all
seriously involved in a Prairie Park effort, I would veer away from
this vision. It comes across to me as seriously too radical, and too
unrealistic: a trouble-maker and a deal-breaker. I'd let the Buffalo
Commons people do their own thing, without piggy-backing or tying my
Park-ideas to their stuff. It would not surprise me to learn that
Buffalo Commons has actually served to impede the prospect of a
Prairie Park.

Biofuels is another large factor. This is the 21st C., when we wean
ourselves off geological hydrocarbons and shift to 'alternative'
energy resources. Biofuels and other non-traditional, non-food crops
are likely to increase in prevalance and importance. It is preferable
to put fuel crops on land that is not suitable for food-crops, and as
biofuel cultivation eats further into our food-crops, I would not be
surprised to see this become a top issue. Land that is now unusable
for
agriculture is exactly where we should try to establish biofuel and
other industrial crops.

I think that a Prairie National Park somewhere in the prairie region,
or maybe an International Park with Canada, is a good idea. Whether
Kansas is the right place to try to site it, I don't myself know right
off, but that is a question that should, and I expect can be (has
been) addressed & answered, fairly straight-forward. National-level
environmentalists may well already have taken a good look at this
question, and may have tentatively identified several siting-options
that look like the 'best buys' to them. If Kansas is on the list -
great; but if not, well...

Using National Parks as a means to advance economic development goals
is a bit far off their mission. There can be benefits, but they're
secondary. The prairie per se is not much of a tourist-draw: Buffalo
would work better, but the prospect of dramatic, large herds seems
remote. The successful management of buffalo really requires that they
remain low-key ... that it be easy to keep them in the Park. Big,
energetic herds expressing primal wanderlust are probably out.

Yellowstone draws tourists with their buffalo, but for one thing,
their buffalo-program is a big problem that is highly unlikely to be
repeated elsewhere. Secondly, the rugged, confining terrain and the
available graze and the roads in Yellowstone all come together to put
the buffalo nicely in front of tourists along the roadside. On the
prairie, there is nothing to stop buffalo from shying well back from
vehicles & roads.

In fact, I know folks who have gone to the buffalo project in the
Dakotas, and when asked about buffalo, they wrinkled their face and
said, "Yeah, we saw them...", holding up the forefinger and thumb with
about a half a millimeter gap, "... waay off".

With what will have to be a modest, poorly-accessible
buffalo-population, a Prairie National Park should I think be accepted
as a rather low-key and unpretentious facility. Those who know their
ecology & biomes will go out of they're way to visit, but it wouldn't
seem to readily lend itself as a 'destination' like Yellowstone or
Yosemite, which can make significant money from 'recreational/consumer
tourism'.

With those caveats, a Prairie National Park does sound cool.

Ted Clayton
