San Francisco says ‘arrivederci’ to Columbus Day
================================================

Joshua Sabatini

23 January 2018
  
San Francisco Examiner

https://www.sfexaminer.com/news/san-francisco-says-arrivederci-to-columbus-day/
    
Despite opposition from Italian-Americans, the Board of Supervisors
voted Tuesday to replace Columbus Day with Indigenous Peoples Day —
advancing a nationwide movement to cease honoring the Genoa explorer
and instead the victims of colonization.

The Board of Supervisors voted 10 to 1 to amend the administrative
code “to declare the second Monday in October to be Indigenous Peoples
Day.”

SEE RELATED: SF to replace Columbus Day with Indigenous Peoples Day

It requires “all official city communications, notices, calendars, and
other publications, whether electronic or paper, shall refer to that
day as Indigenous Peoples Day rather than Columbus Day.”

The legislation was introduced by Supervisor Malia Cohen as part of a
nationwide movement by Native American activists to do away with the
federal holiday, which began in 1937. They argue it is wrong to
celebrate a day named after the Italian explorer since the land he
discovered was already inhabited, and it marked the start of
colonization that decimated their ancestors.

But Italian-Americans, who have long celebrated their heritage on that
day, opposed the legislation.

“This is an insult to the Italians who have done so much for the city
of San Francisco,” Christina Olivolo, of the Le Donne d’Italia, a
Italian Women’s club in San Francisco, said after the vote. “And so
much of what San Francisco is famous for now is because of the
Italians.”

She named contributions like Fisherman’s Wharf, Joe DiMaggio and how
“after the 1906 earthquake, it was the Italians who rebuilt this city
in an impressive amount of time.”

Olivolo said she was “fine with getting rid of the name Columbus
Day. I sympathize with the indigenous people in that way. I would
prefer they call it Italian Heritage Day. That is the day of Italians
to honor Italians.”

Supervisor Aaron Peskin, who represents San Francisco’s Italian
neighborhood North Beach, requested a postponement, but his request
was opposed by the board and he voted against the proposal.

“We received lots of emails about this. I would like some time to see
if we can figure out a path forward that works both for our indigenous
native peoples as well as for folks of Italian heritage,” Peskin said,
in asking for a one-week postponement on the vote.

Cohen opposed the postponement. “It is important. It has been
discussed in committee,” she said.

The board sided with Cohen, shooting down the continuance in a 7-4
vote. Peskin and supervisors Hillary Ronen, Katy Tang and Mark Farrell
supported the continuance.

North Beach’s Italian-American community was surprised by the
proposal, according to Marc Bruno, a resident of that neighborhood. He
called on the board to postpone the vote.

“The Italian Athletic Club, the Italian Cathedral of the West,
Sts. Peter and Paul Church, the sponsors of the Italian American
Heritage Parade and Italian Community Services were excluded from the
process until representatives of these groups were first phoned by the
San Francisco Examiner four days ago,” Bruno wrote in an email Tuesday
to the board.

He also said the proposal was noticed in a misleading way, because it
didn’t indicate it would replace Columbus Day.

Italian-Americans who opposed the proposal supported naming any other
day for indigenous peoples.

“San Francisco is inclusive and open-minded and not divisive. The
board had an opportunity today to not choose or replace or pick one —
those terms are not inclusive. They mean you over you,” said Steven
Cursi, a resident. “Why are we saying you can’t have your day, we are
going to give it to indigenous people. I completely support an
Indigenous Peoples Day. Give them a week.”

Yee said that he would like to support legislation in the future “to
also honor the Italian American heritage. So for me it’s not taking
one away for another.”

Ronen said she supported the postponement in the spirit of working out
a compromise, but said Cohen’s proposal was “long overdue.”
“Correcting our history and the history of the native people that were
brutally both slaughtered and killed off by disease who were in this
land prior to an Italian explorer coming and ‘discovering’ the land
that people had been on for a very long time is very overdue,” Ronen
said.

The legislation referred to a 2007 Human Rights Commission report
titled “Discrimination by Omission: Issues of Concern for Native
Americans in San Francisco.”

“For Native Americans, a federal holiday honoring Christopher Columbus
is an insulting gesture. For millions, 1492 marked the beginning of
the implementation of policies designed to systematically exterminate
Native American people and their cultures,” the 2007 report reads.

~
